1. Symmetric 2×2 PD With Ordinal Payoffs
In its simplest form the PD is a game described by the payoff
matrix:
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
satisfying the following chain of inequalities:

\
There are two players, Row and Column. Each has two possible moves,
“cooperate” ) or “defect” ),
corresponding, respectively, to the options of remaining silent or
confessing in the illustrative anecdote above. For each possible pair
of moves, the payoffs to Row and Column  are listed in
the appropriate cell. \ is the “reward” payoff that
each player receives if both cooperate. \ is the
“punishment” that each receives if both defect. \ is
the “temptation” that each receives as sole defector and
\ is the “sucker” payoff that each receives as sole
cooperator. We assume here that the game is symmetric, i.e., that the
reward, punishment, temptation and sucker payoffs are the same for
each player, and payoffs have only ordinal significance, i.e., they
indicate whether one payoff is better than another, but tell us
nothing about how much better. It is now easy to see that we have the
structure of a dilemma like the one in the story. Suppose Column
cooperates. Then Row gets \ for cooperating and \ for
defecting, and so is better off defecting. Suppose Column defects.
Then Row gets \ for cooperating and \ for defecting, and so is
again better off defecting. The move \ for Row is said to
strictly dominate
the move \: whatever Column does, Row
is better off choosing \ than \. By symmetry \ also
strictly dominates \ for Column. Thus two “rational”
players will defect and receive a payoff of \, while two
“irrational” players can cooperate and receive greater
payoff \. In standard treatments, game theory assumes rationality
and common knowledge. Each player is rational, knows the other is
rational, knows that the other knows he is rational, etc. Each player
also knows how the other values the outcomes. But since \
strictly dominates \ for both players, the argument for dilemma
here requires only that each player knows his own payoffs.  It is also worth noting that the outcome \\)
of both players defecting is the game's only strict nash equilibrium,
i.e., it is the only outcome from which each player could only do
worse by unilaterally changing its move. Flood and Dresher's interest
in their dilemma seems to have stemmed from their view that it
provided a counterexample to the claim that the nash equilibria of a
game constitute its natural “solutions”.
If there can be “ties” in rankings of the payoffs,
condition PD1 can be weakened without destroying the nature of the
dilemma. For suppose that one of the following conditions obtains:

\, or
\
Then, for each player, although \ does not strictly dominate
\, it still
weakly dominates
in the sense that each
player always does at least as well, and sometimes better, by playing
\. Under these conditions it still seems rational to play
\, which again results in the payoff that neither player
prefers. Let us call a game that meets PD2 a
weak PD
. Note
that in a weak PD that does not satisfy PD1 mutual defection is no
longer a nash equilibrium in the strict sense defined above. It is
still, however, the only nash equilibrium in the weaker sense, that
neither player can improve its position by unilaterally changing its
move. Again, one might suppose that if there is a unique nash
equilibrium of this weaker variety, rational self-interested players
would reach it.
2. Asymmetry
Without assuming symmetry, the PD can be represented by using
subscripts \ and \ for the payoffs to Row and Column.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
If we assume that the payoffs are ordered as before for each player,
i.e., that \ when \, then, as
before, \ is the strictly dominant move for both players, but
the outcome \\) of both players making this move is worse
for each than \\). The force of the dilemma can now also be
felt under weaker conditions, however. Consider the following three
pairs of inequalities:

a.
\ and
\
b.
\ and
\
c.
\ and
\
If these conditions all obtain the argument for dilemma goes through
as before. Defection strictly dominates cooperation for each player,
and \\) is strictly preferred by each to \\). If
one of the two \ signs in each of the conditions
\–\ is replaced by a weak inequality sign ) we
have a weak PD. \ weakly dominates \ for each player
 is as good as \ in all cases and better in some)
and \\) weakly better than \\) . Since none of the
clauses requires comparisons between \'s payoffs and \'s, we
need not assume that \ has any “interpersonal”
significance.
Now suppose we drop the first inequality of either \ or \ . A game that meets the resulting conditions might be termed
a
common knowledge PD
. As long as each player knows that the
other is rational and each knows the other's ordering of payoffs, we
still feel the force of the dilemma. For suppose a holds. Then \
is the dominant move for Row. Column, knowing that Row is rational,
knows that Row will defect, and so, by the remaining inequality in
\, will defect himself. Similarly, if \ holds Column will
defect, and Row, realizing this, will defect herself. By \, the
resulting \\) is again worse for both than
\\).
3. Cardinal Payoffs and Impure PDs
If the game specifies absolute  payoffs, then
universal cooperation may not be a pareto optimal outcome even in the
two person PD. For under some conditions both players do better by
adopting a
mixed
strategy of cooperating with probability
\ and defecting with probability \\). This point is
illustrated in the graphs below.
Figure 1
Here the \ and \ axes represent the utilities of Row and
Column. The four outcomes entered in the matrix of the second section
are represented by the labeled dots. Conditions PD3a and PD3b 
 ensure that \\) and \\) lie northwest and
southeast of \\), and PD3c is reflected in the fact that
\\) lies northeast of \\). Suppose first that
\\) and \\) lie on opposite sides of the line
between \\) and \\), as in the graph on the left.
Then the four points form a convex quadrilateral, and the payoffs of
the feasible outcomes of mixed strategies are represented by all the
points on or within this quadrilateral. Of course a player can really
only get one of four possible payoffs each time the game is played,
but the points in the quadrilateral represent the
expected
values
of the payoffs to the two players. If Row and Column
cooperate with probabilities \ and \  and \), for example, then the
expected value of the payoff to Row is \. A
rational self-interested player, according to a standard view, should
prefer a higher expected payoff to a lower one. In the graph on the
left the payoff for universal cooperation  is
pareto optimal among the payoffs for all mixed strategies. In the
graph on the right, however, where both \\) and \\) lie southwest of the line between \\) and \\), the story is more complicated. Here the payoffs of the
feasible outcome lie within a figure bounded on the northeast by three
distinct curve segments, two linear and one concave. Notice that
\\) is now in the interior of the region bounded by solid
lines, indicating that there are mixed strategies that provide both
players a higher expected payoff than \\). It is important
to note that we are talking about independent mixed strategies here.
Row and Column use private randomizing devices and have no
communication. If they were able to correlate their mixed strategies,
so as to ensure, say \\) with probability \ and \\) with probability \, the set of feasible solutions would
extend up to  the dotted line between \\) and
\\). The point here is that, even confined to independent
strategies, there are some games satisfying PD3 in which both players
can both do better than they do with universal cooperation. A PD in
which universal cooperation is pareto optimal may be called a pure PD.
 A pure PD is characterized by adding to PD3
the following condition.

\ \le \)
In a symmetric game \ reduces to the simpler condition

\\)
.
4. Multiple Moves and the Optional PD
Speaking generally, one might say that a PD is a game in which a
“cooperative” outcome obtainable only when every player
violates rational self-interest is unanimously preferred to the
“selfish” outcome obtained when every player adheres to
rational self-interest. We can characterize the selfish outcome either
as the result of each player pursuing its dominant 
strategy, or as the unique weak  nash equilibrium. In a two
move game the two characterizations come to the same thing—a
dominant move pair is a unique equilibrium and a unique equilibrium is
a dominant move pair. As the payoff matrix below shows, however, the
two notions diverge in a game with more than two moves.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Here each player can choose “cooperate”, )
“defect”  ), or “neither”
),and the payoffs are ordered as before. Defection is no
longer dominant, because each player is better off choosing \
than \ when the other chooses \. Nevertheless \\) is still the unique equilibrium. Let us label a game like this
in which the selfish outcome is the unique equilibrium an
equilibrium PD
, and one in which the selfish outcome is a
pair of dominant moves a
dominance PD
. As will be seen below,
attempts to “solve” the PD by allowing conditional
strategies can create multiple-move games that are themselves
equilibrium PDs.
Three-move games with a slightly different structure have received
attention under the label “optional PD.” See, for example,
Kitcher , Kitcher , Batali and Kitcher, Szabó and
Hauert, Orbell and Dawes , and Orbell and Dawes . The
first three sources take optional games also to allow players to
signal willingness to engage  or \ against)
particular opponents. The simple three-move games without signaling
discussed in this section are called “semi-optional” in
Batali and Kitcher. \ and \ payoffs are ordered as before,
but the payoff matrix now contains, in addition, an
“opt-out” value, \, that lies between \ and
\.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
In this version of the game, defection is no longer a dominant move
and mutual defection is no longer an equilibrium outcome. If Column
cooperates, Row does best by defecting; if Column defects, Row does
best by playing \; and if Column plays \, then Row does
equally well by playing any move. From the outcome of mutual \
either player can benefit by unilaterally switching to \. But
from the outcome of mutual \, neither party can benefit by
unilaterally changing moves. So the optional PD is a weak equilibrium
PD, with \ playing the role of defection. Orbell and Dawes  add the additional condition that the opt-out payoff \
is equal to zero. In an optional PD, a rational player will engage
 or \) if and only if she expects her
opponent to cooperate. For, if her opponent does cooperate, she will
be guaranteed at least \ by engaging and exactly \ by not
engaging, whereas if her opponent does not cooperate she will be
guaranteed at most \ by engaging and exactly \ by not
engaging. This feature becomes especially salient when \ is zero,
for then the payoff for engaging is positive if and only if one's
opponent cooperates.
The description of the “neither” move and
“opt-out” payoffs varies somewhat in accounts of the
optional PD. For Kitcher they frequently represent a choice to
“go solo.” For example, a baboon, rather than thoroughly
or sloppily grooming a partner in exchange for being groomed
thoroughly or sloppily by its partner, may choose to groom itself.
Often, on the other hand, it is suggested is that \ represents a
choice to “sit out” the game, perhaps in order to obtain a
more suitable partner with whom to play later. The significance of
this difference, if any, will emerge in iterated and evolutionary
versions of the game.  Those who
write about the optional PD often express the hope that it might
provide a suitable model to investigate the idea that cooperation can
be achieved if agents select the partners with whom they interact.
That idea is modeled somewhat differently, and perhaps more directly,
in Social Network Games discussed in
section 19
below. Further discussion of the idea is left to that section.
Orbell and Dawes are particularly concerned with an explanation for
cooperative behavior that rests on the empirically supported
hypothesis that individuals often base expectations about behavior of
others on their knowledge of their own behavior and tendencies. This
hypothesis suggests that a cooperator is more likely than a defector
to expect others to cooperate and therefore, if he is rational, more
likely to engage in the optional PD. Orbell and Dawes 
demonstrate that, if a cooperator is substantially more likely than a
defector to expect his opponent to cooperate, then , a cooperator can
actually expect a higher return than a defector in the optional PD.
Orbell and Dawes  present experimental evidence that
participants in an optional PD do receive higher average payouts than
those in the corresponding PD lacking the \ move. They provide
clever statistical arguments to support the following hypotheses:
intending cooperators  do
better in the optional PD than in the corresponding PD; intending
defectors generally do worse in the optional PD; under some conditions
these gains and losses are sufficient to make the intending
cooperators better off than the intending defectors ; and,
finally, those who expect cooperation from others  do so on the basis of their own tendency to
cooperate rather rather than any direct discernment of the character
of their opponent. 
5. Multiple Players, Tragedies of the Commons, Voting and Public Goods
Most of those who maintain that the PD illustrates something important
about morality seem to believe that the basic structure of the game is
reflected in situations that larger groups, perhaps entire societies,
face. The most obvious generalization from the two-player to the
many-player game would pay each player the reward ) if all
cooperate, the punishment ) if all defect, and, if some
cooperate and some defect, it would pay the cooperators the sucker
payoff ) and the defectors the temptation ). But it is
unlikely that we face many situations of this structure.
A common view is that a multi-player PD structure is reflected in what
Garret Hardin popularized as “the tragedy of the commons.”
Each member of a group of neighboring farmers prefers to allow his cow
to graze on the commons, rather than keeping it on his own inadequate
land, but the commons will be rendered unsuitable for grazing if more
than some threshold number use it. More generally, there is some
social benefit \ that each member can achieve if sufficiently many
pay a cost \. We might represent the payoff matrix as follows:
more than \
choose \
\ or fewer
choose \
\
\
\
\
\
\
The cost \ is assumed to be a negative number. The
“temptation” here is to get the benefit without the cost,
the reward is the benefit with the cost, the punishment is to get
neither and the sucker payoff is to pay the cost without realizing the
benefit. So the payoffs are ordered \ \gt 0 \gt C\). As in
the two-player game, it appears that \ strongly dominates
\ for all players, and so rational players would choose \
and achieve 0, while preferring that everyone would choose \ and
obtain \.
Unlike the more straightforward generalization, this matrix does
reflect, in a highly idealized way, common social choices —
between depleting and conserving a scarce resource, between using
polluting and non-polluting means of manufacture or disposal, and
between participating and not participating in a group effort towards
some common goal. When the number of players is small, it represents a
version of what has been called the “volunteer dilemma”. A
group needs a few volunteers, but each member is better off if others
volunteer.  is zero and the top right outcome
is impossible. Under these conditions \ no longer dominates
\ and the game loses its PD flavor.) A particularly vexing
manifestation of this game occurs when a vaccination known to have
serious risks is needed to prevent the outbreak of a fatal disease. If
enough of her neighbors get the vaccine, each person may be protected
without assuming therisks.
One idealizion here of the situations described is that the costs and
benefits of cooperation are assumed to be independent of the number of
those who cooperate. Until the threshold of cooperation is exceeded,
nobody gets the benefit. Afterwards, everyone does. They are, in the
terminology of Frolich et al, lumpy. This is not true of, say, a lake
made clean when residents refrain from dumping waste into it, or a gas
supply maintained by users' conservation. We will consider relaxing
this idealization later. For now, note that a situation more closely
mirrored by the matrix is faced by the supporters of a particular
political candidate or proposition who face the choice of whether to
vote in a majority-rule election. Once enough supporters to constitute
a majority choose to vote, additional votes will not increase their
benefit. For this reason we might call the game described by the
matrix above a voting game.
The voting game, as characterized above, has a somewhat different
character than the two-player PD. First, even if each player's moves
are entirely independent of the others, the alternatives represented
by the columns in the commons matrix above are no longer independent
of the alternatives represented by the rows. My choosing \
necessarily increases the chances that more than \ people will
choose \. To ensure independence we should really redraw the
matrix as follows:
more than \ others
choose \
\ others choose \
fewer than \ others
choose \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
But now we see that move \ does
not
dominate \,
as it does in the 2-player prisoner's dilemma. When we are at the
threshold of adequate cooperation, where exactly \ others choose
\, I am better off cooperating. Similarly, whereas mutual
defection is the only nash equilibrium in the original PD, this game
has two equilibria. One is universal defection, since any player
unilaterally departing from that outcome will move from payoff 0 to
\. But a second is the state of
minimally effective
cooperation, where the number of cooperators is just sufficient to
obtain the benefit. A defector who unilaterally departs from that
outcome will move from \ to \ and a cooperator who
unilaterally departs will move from \ to 0. Finally, in the
orginal PD, every outcome except universal defecton is pareto
optimal--i.e., as long as at least one of the players cooperates,
there is no outcome in which in which each player is at least as well
off and one is better off. In the voting game, on the other hand, only
the states of minimally effective cooperation are pareto optimal. If
the number of cooperators exceeds the threshold by one or more, a new
defector will benefit himself while hurting no others.
In view of these properties, it may seem that the voting game presents
far less of a dilemma than the PD. There are, after all, equilibria
that are pareto-optimal outcomes. In practice, however, it is
difficult to see how these equilibria could be attained and the
all-defect equilibrium could be avoided. When n is large, defection
“almost dominates” cooperation. In the voting case, for
example, a player might plausibly reason: if few of my fellow
supporters vote, my vote will be futile, if many of them do it will be
unneccessary. Even if a group were in the unlikely situation of being
just below the threshold of minimally effective cooperation, a
prospective voter would have no way of knowing this. In the pollution
and conservation examples moves should really not be modeled as
simultaneous , so we may perhaps be a
little more optimistic. By observing the actions of those who have
moved previously a player might know whether at his turn the threshold
of minimally effective cooperation is near. In most real-world
situations, however, a player can deduce this only by observing the
effects of those actions, and often these effects manifest themselves
only after his move is made. A conspicuous example of this delay
effect might be the succession of carbon-emitting activities leading
to climate change.
In examples philosophers discuss as instances of prisoner's dilemma,
it is taken to be obvious that universal cooperation is the most
socially desirable outcome. In the voters dilemma, since minimally
effective cooperation is pareto superior, one might think that we
should aim instead for that outcome. But this seems to depend on the
nature of the choices involved. In the medical example it may seem best
to vaccinate everyone. In the agricultural example, however, it seems
foolish to stipulate that nobody use the commons. Someone who avoids
vaccination in the former case is seen as a “free rider”.
An underused commons in the latter seems to exemplify “surplus
cooperation.” All these cases seem to raise questions of
fairness. If t+1 is the size of a minimally effective collection of
players, then any profile in which exactly t+1 players cooperate is a
pareto optimal equilibrium. If there is no reason to prefer one such
profile over another, it is possible that fairness would dictate
choosing the inferior outcome of universal cooperation.
The two-person version of the tragedy of the commons game  produces a matrix presenting considerably less of a
dilemma.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
This game captures David Hume's example of a boat with one oarsman on
the port side and another on the starboard  and exertion
) simultaneously). If either rows alone, she exerts herself to
no good effect, which is worse than had she merely rested. Mutual
cooperation here is identical to minimally effective cooperation and
therefore is both an equilibrium outcome and a pareto optimal outcome.
Games of this sort are discussed in
section 8
below,
 under the label “stag hunt.”
The above representations of the tragedy of the commons make the
simplifying assumptions that the costs and benefits of cooperation are
the same for each player, that the cost of cooperation is independent
of the number of players who cooperate, and that the size of the
benefit  or \\)) depends only on whether the number of
cooperators exceeds the threshold. A somewhat more general account
would replace \ and \ by functions \\) and \\),
representing the cost of cooperation to player \ when he is one of
exactly \ players who cooperate and the benefit to player \
when exactly \ players cooperate. We suppose that there is some
threshold \ for minimally effective cooperation so that \\)
is not defined unless \. We may also assume additional
cooperation never reduces the benefit \ gets from effective
cooperation, i.e., \ \ge B\) when \ and that
additional defection never reduces the cost \ bears in
cooperating, i.e., \ \ge C\). Now suppose, in addition,
that, once the threshold of effective cooperation has been exceeded,
any benefit one gets from from the presence of an additional
cooperator is exceeded by one's cost of cooperation and that the costs
of ineffective cooperation are genuine, i.e., for all players \,
\ \gt +C )\) when \ is greater than \
and \\) when \ is less than or equal to \.
Finally, suppose that the benefits to each player \, of effective
cooperation exceed the costs, i.e., for \, \+C
\gt 0\). We then have a tragedy of the commons game, which presents a
familiar dilemma: defection benefits an individual in every
circumstance  others cooperate) but
everybody is better off in any state of effective cooperation than in
any state without it. This account could be easily be modified to
allow threshold of minimally effective cooperation to differ from one
individual to another 's clean water requirements might be more
stringent than \'s for example) or to allow \ to be defined
everywhere . The resulting game would still have its
PD flavor.
Phillip Pettit has pointed out that examples that might be represented
as many-player PDs come in two flavors. The examples discussed above
might be classified as free-rider problems. My temptation is to enjoy
some benefits brought about by burdens shouldered by others. The other
flavor is what Pettit calls “foul dealer” problems. My
temptation is to benefit myself by hurting others. Suppose, for
example, that a group of people are applying for a single job, for
which they are equally qualified. If all fill out their applications
honestly, they all have an equal chance of being hired. If one lies,
however, he can ensure that he is hired while, let us say, incurring a
small risk of being exposed later. If everyone lies, they again have
an equal chance for the job, but now they all incur the risk of
exposure. Thus a lone liar, by reducing the others' chances of
employment from slim to none, raises his own chances from slim to
sure. As Pettit points out, when the minimally effective level of
cooperation is the same as the size of the population, there is no
opportunity for free-riding , and so
the PD must be of the foul-dealing variety. But  not all foul-dealing PDs seem to have this
feature. Suppose, for example, that two applicants in the story above
will be hired. Then everyone gets the benefit  unless two or more players lie.
Nevertheless, the liars seem to be foul dealers rather than free
riders. A better characterization of the foul-dealing dilemma might be
that every defection from a generally cooperative state strictly
reduces the payoffs to the cooperators, i.e., for every player \
and every \ greater than the threshold, \+ C \gt
B+ C\). A free-rider's defection benefits himself but does
not, by itself, hurt the cooperators. A foul-dealer's defection
benefits himself and hurts the cooperators.
The game labeled a many-person PD in Schelling, in Molander 1992, and
elsewhere requires that the payoff to each co-operator and defector
increases strictly with the number of cooperators and that the sum of
the payoffs to all parties increases with the number of cooperators
. Neither of these conditions is met by the formulation
above, and one may question whether they are appropriate for the
examples given. The margin of victory would not seem to raise the
value of winning an election. Natural filtering systems may allow a
body of water to absorb a certain amount of waste with zero harmful
effects. It is often plausible, however, to maintain that they hold
“locally,” i.e., for \ close to the threshold \
for minimally effective cooperation, it may be reasonable to assume
that:
for every individual \, \+C \gt B+C\) for \,
for every individual \, \ \gt C\) for \, and 

\[

\begin{align}
 &B+ C + \ldots +  B + C \\
     & \quad\quad + B) + \ldots + B \\
     & \ \gt B + C + \ldots + B + C \\
     & \quad\quad + B + \ldots + B.
\end{align}

\]
By requiring that cooperation of others always strictly benefits each
player, the Schelling and Molander formulations of the \-person PD
fail to model the surplus cooperation/free rider phenomenon that seems
to infuse many of the tragedy-of-commons examples. Their conditions
might, however be a plausible model for certain
public good
dilemmas. It is not unreasonable to suppose that
any
contribution towards public health, national defense, highway safety,
or clean air is valuable to all, no matter how little or how much we
already have, but that the cost to each for his own contribution to
those goods always exceeds the benefit that he derives from that
contribution. A particularly simple game meeting the conditions above
is the
public goods game
. Each player may choose to
contribute either nothing or a fixed utility C to a common store.
Contributions to the store are added together, mutiplied by some
factor greater than one, and divided equally among the members of the
group. In this way a player benefits by same amount from the
contributions of others whether she contributes herself or not, and
loses by the same  amount from her own contribution whether
others contribute or not. This is not true of PD's in general, though
it is true of the exchange game mentioned in the introduction.
The formulations of Schelling and Per Molander and the public goods
game have the advantage of focusing attention on the PD quality of the
game. Defection dominates cooperation, while universal cooperation is
unanimously preferred to universal defection. Michael Taylor goes even
further in this direction. His version of the many-person PD requires
only the two PD-conditions just mentioned and the one additional
condition that defectors are always better off when some cooperate
than when none do. 
These ideas can be made more perspicuous by some pictures, which
suggest additional refinements and extensions. Figure 2 below
illustrates the voting game. In graph 2, twenty five
supporters are choosing whether to vote in a majority-rule
election. Utility to a player i is plotted against the number of those
other than i who vote. Dark disks represent cooperators  and
circles represent defectors . When the number of other
voters is fewer than twelve or greater than twelve then defection
beats cooperation. But when exactly twelve others vote it benefits i
to vote.


Figure 2
In figure 2 smooth curves are drawn through the lines
and circles to illustrate a more general form of the voting game. The
utilities to cooperators and defectors are represented by two S-shaped
curves. The curves intersect in two places. Now, instead of a single
point of minimally effective cooperation, we have a small region
between the two curves where cooperation beats defection. In terms of
the polluted lake example, we might suppose that to the left of the
first intersection, pollution is so bad that my additional
contribution makes it no worse, and to the right of the second
intersection, the lake is so healthy that it can handle my refuse with
no ill effects. The intersection points are both equilibria, the
polluting and fastitidious residents both lose by changing behavior.
In terms of the voting example, we might suppose that the behavior of
non-supporters is uncertain and the region between the curves
represents the situations in which my vote increases the odds of
winning in a way that exceeds my cost of voting.
The more general voting game satisfies the Schelling/Molander
condition that utility of each player increases strictly with the
level of cooperation only near the region where cooperation is
effective. In figure 3 below the S-curves are bent so that this
condition is met everywhere. In 3 the two curves
still intersect twice. Bovens, which contains a very illuminating
taxonomy of n-player games, labels
this
form the voting game
and argues that it best represents situations described in the
literature as tragedies of the commons. Note that if there is a
value of x at which both curves lie above the equilibria, as there
must be if the curves are upward sloping, then the equilibria here
cannot be pareto optimal . Hence the tragedy.
In graph 3 there are no intersections between the two
curves. Thus the second of the Schelling/Molander conditions for a PD
is also met: defection dominates cooperation. The final condition,
that cooperation always raises the sum of utilities, is not so easily
pictured, but, because the slopes of the two curves are positive, we
can be sure that it will be met if the population is sufficiently
large.


Figure 3
Benefits are somewhat less lumpy in these two games than the previous
two. Lumpiness can by further reduced by further flattening the
curves. At the limit, we get the public goods game shown in the first
graph of figure 4. Here the curves are straight lines. Each additional
cooperator provides both defectors and cooperators with the same
additional benefit of mc/n where c is the cost of donation, m is the
stipulated multiplier and n is the number of players in the game. If
the curves are sufficiently flat, they can intersect at most
once. Altogether there are three possibilities: the game pictured in
figure 4, where the two curves do not intersect, the one pictured
in 4, where cooperators' utility is above the defectors'
to the left of the intersection and below it to the right, and the one
pictured in 4, where the defectors' utility starts above that of
the cooperators' and ends up below it. In the 4, one
benefits by cooperating when few of the others do and defecting when
most of the others cooperate. Bovens plausibly suggests that this
should be regarded as a many-player version of the game of chicken: go
straight if your opponent swerves and swerve if your opponent goes
straight. In 4, one benefits by defecting when most others do
and cooperating when most others do. As Bovens suggests, this might be
regarded as a many-person version of the stag hunt: hunt together or
separately if your opponent does likewise.  .
 The first possibility, as we have seen, meets conditions plausibly
associated with the PD.



Figure 4
6. Single Person Interpretations
The PD is usually thought to illustrate conflict between individual
and collective rationality, but the multiple player form  has also been interpreted as demonstrating problems
within standard conceptions of individual rationality. One such
interpretation, elucidated in Quinn, derives from an example of
Parfit's. A medical device enables electric current to be applied to a
patient's body in increments so tiny that there is no perceivable
difference between adjacent settings. You are attached to the device
and given the following choice every day for ten years: advance the
device one setting and collect a thousand dollars, or leave it where
it is and get nothing. Since there is no perceivable difference
between adjacent settings, it is apparently rational to advance the
setting each day. But at the end of ten years the pain is so great
that a rational person would sacrifice all his wealth to return to the
first setting.
We can view the situation here as a multi-player PD in which each
“player” is the temporal stage of a single person. So
viewed, it has at least two features that were not discussed in
connection with the multi-player examples. First, the moves of the
players are sequential rather than simultaneous . Second, there is the matter of
gradation. Increases in electric current between adjacent settings are
imperceptible, and therefore irrelevant to rational decision-making,
but sums of a number such increases are noticeable and highly
relevant. Neither of these features, however, is peculiar to
one-person examples. Consider, for example, the choice between a
polluting and non-polluting means of waste disposal. Each resident of
a lakeside community may dump his or her garbage in the lake or use a
less convenient landfill. It is reasonable to suppose that each acts
in the knowledge of how others have acted before.  It is also reasonable to
suppose that addition of one can of garbage to the lake has no
perceptible effect on water quality, and therefore no effect on the
welfare of the residents. The fact that the dilemma remains suggests
that PD-like situations sometimes involve something more than a
conflict between individual and collective rationality. In the
one-person example, our understanding that we care more about our
overall well-being than that of our temporal stages does not  eliminate the argument that it is rational to continue to
adjust the setting. Similarly, in the pollution example, a decision to
let collective rationality override individual rationality may not
eliminate the argument for excessive dumping. It seems appropriate,
however, to separate this issue from that raised in the standard PD.
Gradations that are imperceptible individually, but weighty en masse
give rise to intransitive preferences. This is a challenge to standard
accounts of rationality whether or not it arises in a PD-like
setting.
A second one-person interpretation of the PD is suggested in Kavka,
1991. On Kavka's interpretation, the prisoners are not temporal
stages, but rather “subagents” reflecting different
desiderata that I might bring to bear on a decision. Let us imagine
that I am hungry and considering buying a snack. The options open to
me are:
Buy a scoop of chocolate gelato.
Buy a scoop of orange sherbet.
Buy a granola bar.
Buy nothing.
My health-conscious side, “Arnold,” orders these options
in the following order: \, \, \, \. My taste-conscious
side, “Eppie,” ranks them: \, \, \, \.
Such inner conflict among preferences might often be resolved in ways
consistent with standard views about individual choice. My overall
preference ordering, for example, might be determined from a weighted
average of the utilities that Arnold and Eppie assign to each of the
options. It is also possible, Kavka suggests, that my inner conflicts
are resolved as if they were a result of strategic interaction among
rational subagents. In this case, Arnold and Eppie can each choose
either to
insist
on getting their way \\) or to
acquiesce
to a compromise \\). The interaction between
subagents can then be represented by the following payoff matrix,
where Arnold plays row and Eppie plays column.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Examination of the table and preference orderings confirms that we
again have an intrapersonal PD. Kavka argues that a story like this
might “provide a psychologically plausible picture of how
internal conflict can lead to suboptimal action.” It also
undermines a standard view that choices reflect values in favor of one
that they partially reflect, “the structure of inner
conflict.”
7. The PD with Replicas and Causal Decision Theory
One controversial argument that it is rational to cooperate in a PD
relies on the observation that my partner in crime is likely to think
and act very much like I do.  In
the extreme case, my accomplice is an exact
replica
of me who
is wired just as I am so that, of necessity, we do the same thing. It
would then seem that the only two possible outcomes are where both
players cooperate and where both players defect. Since the reward
payoff exceeds the punishment payoff, I should cooperate. More
generally, even if my accomplice is not a perfect replica, the odds of
his cooperating are greater if I cooperate and the odds of his
defecting are greater if I defect. When the correlation between our
behaviors is sufficiently strong or the differences in payoffs is
sufficiently great, my
expected
payoff  is higher if I cooperate than if I defect. The
counter argument, of course, is that my action is
causally
independent
of my replica's. Since I can't affect what my
accomplice does and since, whatever he does, my payoff is greater if I
defect, I should defect. These arguments closely resemble the
arguments for two positions on the
Newcomb Problem
, a puzzle
popularized among philosophers in Nozick.  The Newcomb Problem asks us to
consider two boxes, one transparent and one opaque. In the transparent
box we can see a thousand dollars. The opaque box may contain either a
million dollars or nothing. We have two choices: take the contents of
the opaque box or take the contents of both boxes. We know before
choosing that a reliable predictor of our behavior has put a million
dollars in the opaque box if he predicted we would take the first
choice and left it empty if he predicted we would take the second. To
see that each player in a PD faces a Newcomb problem, consider the
following payoff matrix.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
By “cooperating” , each player
ensures that the other gets a million dollars . By “defecting”  each
player ensures that he will get thousand dollars himself . As long as \,
the structure of this game is an ordinary two-player, two-move PD . Furthermore, the
arguments for “one-boxing” and “two-boxing” in
a Newcomb problem are the same as the arguments for cooperating and
defecting in a prisoner's dilemma where there is positive correlation
between the moves of the players. Two boxing is a
dominant
strategy: two boxes are better than one whether the first one is full
or empty. On the other hand, if the predictor is reliable, the
expected
payoff for one-boxing is greater than the expected
payoff for two-boxing.  and Bermúdez ,
however, for arguments that the two puzzles are significantly
different.)
The intuition that two-boxing is the rational choice in a Newcomb
problem, or that defection is the rational choice in the PD with
positive correlation between the players' moves, seems to conflict
with the idea that rationality requires maximizing expectation. This
apparent conflict has led some to suggest that standard decision
theory needs to be refined in cases in which an agent's actions
provide
evidence
for, without
causing
, the context
in which he is acting. In the case of the PD, standard 
decision theory asks Player One to compare his expected utilities of
cooperation and defection, which can be written as \ \times R + p \times S\) and \ \times T + p \times P\) \) is the conditional probability that player Two
cooperates given that Player One cooperates). If the players' moves
are strongly correlated then \\) and \\) will be close to one and \\) and
\\) will be close to zero. On the suggested
revision, these conditional probabilities should be replaced by some
kind of causally conditional probabilities, which might  be expressed by phrases like “the probability that if
One were to cooperate, Two would also cooperate.” When the moves
are causality independent this would just be the probability that Two
cooperates.
The rather far-fetched scenario described in Newcomb's Problem
initially led some to doubt the importance of the distinction between
causal and evidential decision theory. Lewis argues that the link to
the PD suggests that situations where the two decisions diverge are
not so unusual, and recent writings on causal decision theory contain
many examples far less bizarre than Newcomb's problem. 
In recent years technical machinery from the epistemic foundations of
game theory literature and various logics of conditionals has been
employed to represent arguments for cooperation and defection in
prisoner's dilemma games between replicas . See Bonanno for one example and a
discussion of several others. These representations make clear some
subtle assumptions about the nature of rationality that underly the
arguments. Despite the increasing sophistication of the discussion,
however, there remain people committed to each view.
It might be noted that what is here called “PD between
replicas” is usually called “PD with twins” in the
literature. One reason for the present nomenclature is to distinguish
these ideas from an experimental literature reporting on PD games
played with real  twins.  It turns out that twins
are
more
likely to cooperate in a PD than strangers, but there seems to be no
suggestion that the reasoning that leads them to do so follows the
controversial arguments presented above.
8. The Stag Hunt and the PD
The idea mentioned in the introduction that the PD models a problem of
cooperation among rational agents is sometimes criticized because, in
a true PD, the cooperative outcome is not a nash equilibrium. Any
“problem” of this nature, the critics contend, would be an
unsolvable one.  By changing the payoff structure of the PD slightly, so that the
reward payoff exceeds the temptation payoff, we obtain a game where
mutual cooperation, as well as mutual defection, is a nash
equilibrium. This game is known as the stag hunt. It might provide a
better model for situations where cooperation is difficult, but still
possible, and it may also be a better fit for other roles sometimes
assigned to the PD. More specifically, a stag hunt is a two player,
two move game with a payoff matrix like that for the PD given in
section 1
where the conditions PD1 are replaced by:

a.
\
b.
\
c.
\
The fable dramatizing the game and providing its name, gleaned from a
passage in Rousseau's
Discourse on Inequality
, concerns a
hunting expedition rather than a jail cell interrogation. Two hunters
are are looking to bag a stag. Success is uncertain and, if it comes,
require the efforts of both. On the other hand, either hunter can
forsake his partner and catch a hare with a good chance of success. A
typical payoff matrix is shown below.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Here the “cooperative” move is hunting stag with one's
partner and “defection” is hunting hare by oneself. The
“temptation” payoff in a stag hunt is no longer much of a
temptation, but we retain the payoff terminology for ease of
exposition. In this case the temptation and punishment penalties are
identical, perhaps reflecting the fact that my partner's choice of
prey has no effect on my success in hare-hunting. Alternatively we
could have temptation exceeding punishment, perhaps because hunting
hare is more rewarding together than alone , or we could have
punishment exceeding temptation, perhaps because a second hare hunter
represents unhelpful competition. Either way, the essence of the Stag
Hunt remains. There are two equilibria, one unanimously preferred to
the other. The stag hunt becomes a “dilemma” when
rationality dictates that both players choose the action leading to
the inferior equilibrium. It is clear that if I am certain that my
partner will hunt stag I should join him and that if I am certain that
he will hunt hare I should hunt hare as well. For this reason games
with this structure are sometimes called games of
“assurance” or “trust.”  If I do not know what my
partner will do, standard decision theory tells me to maximize
expectation. This requires, however, that I estimate the probability
of my partner playing \ or \. If I lack information to
form any such estimates, then one putative principle of rationality
 suggests that I ought to treat all
options as equally likely. By this criterion I ought to hunt hare if
and only if the following condition is met:

\
When SHD obtains, hare hunting is said to be the
“risk-dominant” equilibrium. Let us call a stag hunt game
where this condition is met a
stag hunt dilemma
. The matrix
above provides one example.
Another proposed principle of rationality 
suggests that I ought to consider the worst payoff I could obtain
under any course of action, and choose that action that maximizes this
value. Since the sucker payoff is the worst payoff in a stag hunt,
this principle suggests that
any
stag hunt presents a
dilemma. Maximin, however, makes more sense as a principle of
rationality for zero sum games, where it can be assumed that a
rational opponent is trying to minimize my score, than for games like
stag hunt, where a rational opponent may be quite happy to see me do
well, as long as he does so as well.
The stag hunt can be generalized in the obvious way to accommodate
asymmetric and cardinal payoffs. The quadrilateral formed by the
games' graphical representation is convex, so the pure/impure
distinction no longer applies.  The most
obvious way to generalize the game to many players would retain the
condition that there be exactly two equilibria, one unanimously
preferred to the other. This might be a good model for cooperative
activity in which success requires full cooperation. Imagine, for
example, that a single polluter would spoil a lake, or a single leak
would thwart an investigation. If many agents are involved and, by
appeal to indifference or for other reasons, we estimate a fifty-fifty
chance of cooperation from each, then these examples would represent
stag hunt dilemmas in an extreme form. Everyone would benefit if all
cooperate, but only a very trusting fool would think it rational to
cooperate himself. Perhaps some broader generalization to the
many-person case would represent the structure of other familiar
social phenomena, but that matter will not be pursued here.
The cooperative outcome in the stag hunt can be assured by many of the
same means as are discussed here for the PD. As might be expected,
cooperation is somewhat easier to come by in the two-person stag hunt
than in the two-person PD. Details will not be given here, but the
interested reader may consult Skyrms 2004, which is responsible for a
resurgence of interest in this game.
9. Asynchronous Moves and Trust Games
It has often been argued that rational self-interested players can
obtain the cooperative outcome by making their moves conditional on
the moves of the other player. Peter Danielson, for example, favors a
strategy of
reciprocal cooperation
: if the other player would
cooperate if you cooperate and would defect if you don't, then
cooperate, but otherwise defect. Conditional strategies like this are
ruled out in the versions of the game described above, but they may be
possible in versions that more accurately model real world situations.
In this section and the next, we consider two such versions. In this
section we eliminate the requirement that the two players move
simultaneously. Consider the situation of a firm whose sole competitor
has just lowered prices. Or suppose the buyer of a car has just paid
the agreed purchase price and the seller has not yet handed over the
title. We can think of these as situations in which one player has to
choose to cooperate or defect after the other player has already made
a similar choice. The corresponding game is an
asynchronous
or
extended
PD.
Careful discussion of an asynchronous PD example, as Skyrms  and
Vanderschraaf recently note, occurs in the writings of David Hume,
well before Flood and Dresher's formulation of the ordinary PD. Hume
writes about two neighboring grain farmers:
Your corn is ripe today; mine will be so tomorrow. ’Tis
profitable for us both, that I shou'd labour with you to-day, and that
you shou'd aid me to-morrow. I have no kindness for you, and know you
have as little for me. I will not, therefore, take any pains on your
account; and should I labour with you upon my own account, in
expectation of a return, I know I shou'd be disappointed, and that I
shou'd in vain depend upon your gratitude. Here then I leave you to
labour alone: You treat me in the same manner. The seasons change; and
both of us lose our harvests for want of mutual confidence and
security.
In deference to Hume, Skyrms and Vanderschraaf refer to this kind of
asynchronous PD as the “farmer's dilemma.” It is
instructive to picture it in a tree diagram.
Figure 5
Here, time flows to the right. The node marked by a square indicates
Player One's choice point, those marked by circles indicate Player
Two's. The moves and the payoffs to each player are exactly as in the
ordinary PD, but here Player Two can choose his move according to what
Player One does. Tree diagrams like Figure 5 are said to be
extensive-form
game representations, whereas the payoff
matrices given previously are
normal-form
representations. As
Hume's analysis indicates, making the game asynchronous does not
remove the dilemma. Player One knows that if he were to choose \
on the first move, Player Two would choose \ on the second move
, so he would himself
end up with the sucker payoff. If Player One were to choose \,
Player Two would still choose \ , and he would end up with the
punishment payoff. Since he prefers the punishment payoff to the
sucker payoff, Player One will choose \ on the first move and
both players will end up with the punishment payoff. This kind of
“backward” reasoning, in which the players first evaluate
what would happen on the last move if various game histories were
realized, and use this to determine what would happen on preceding
moves applies quite broadly to games in extensive form, and a more
general version of it will be discussed under
finite
iteration
below.
The farmer's dilemma can be represented in normal form by
understanding Player One to be choosing between \ and \
and Player Two to be  choosing among four conditional
moves: cooperate unconditionally \\), defect unconditionally
\\), imitate Player One's move \\), and do the opposite
of Player One's move \\). The result is a two player game with
the following matrix.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
The reader may note that this game is a  equilibrium
dilemma. The sole  nash equilibrium results when Player One
chooses \ and Player Two chooses \, thereby achieving for
themselves the inferior payoffs of \ and \. The game is not,
however, a dominance PD. Indeed, there is no dominant move for either
player. It is commonly believed that rational self-interested players
will reach a nash equilibrium even when neither player has a dominant
move. If so, the farmer's dilemma is still a dilemma.
To preserve the symmetry between the players that characterizes the
ordinary PD, we may wish to modify the asynchronous game. Let us take
extended PD to be played in stages. First each player chooses a first
move \\) and a second move \\). Next a referee determines who moves first, giving
each player an equal chance. Finally the outcome is computed in the
appropriate way. For example, suppose Row plays \\)
 and Column plays \\).
Then Row will get \ if he goes first and \ if he goes second,
which implies that his expected payoff is \\).
Column will get \ if she goes first and \ if she goes second,
giving her an expected payoff of \\). It is
straightforward, but tedious, to calculate the entire eight by eight
payoff matrix. After doing so, the reader may observe that, like the
farmer's dilemma, the symmetric form of the extended PD is an
equilibrium PD, but not a dominance PD. The sole nash equilibrium
occurs when both players adopt the strategy \\), thereby
achieving the inferior payoffs of \\).
Some particularly simple and suggestive variations of on this theme
have been studied under the labels “investor game” or
“trust game” , Berg 
and Bicchieri and Suntuoso  and note that the game nomenclature
is not consistent accross these references.) Player One is given \
units of utility. He may choose to pass any number \
to a “trustee”, who triples that number and passes it to
Player Two. Player Two may then either keep the units that she has or
return some of them to Player One. So formulated, the game has the
advantage that one can take the proportion of her utility that a
player surrenders as her
degree
of cooperativeness. If one
restricts the moves so that Player One may give none or \, and
Player Two may give none or \ one gets exactly the farmer's
dilemma).
In the farmer's dilemma and the trust game, unlike the PD, the
similarly-labeled moves of the two players seem to have somewhat
different flavors. We are more likely to regard Player One's
cooperation as
generous
or perhaps
calculated
, and Player
Two's as
fair
. The label
trusting
is appropriate
only with regard to Player One's cooperative move, though Player Two's
cooperation might be thought to show her to be
worthy
of that
trust.
It may be worth noting that an asynchronous version of the stag hunt,
unlike the PD, presents few issues of interest. If the first player
does his part in the hunt for stag on day one, the second should do
her part on day two. If he hunts hare on day one, she should do
likewise on day two. The first player, realizing this, should hunt
stag on day one. So rational players should have no difficulty
reaching the cooperative outcome in the asynchronous stag hunt.
10. Transparency
Another way that conditional moves can be introduced into the PD is by
assuming that players have the property that David Gauthier has
labeled
transparency
. A fully transparent player is one whose
intentions are completely visible to others. Nobody holds that we
humans are fully transparent, but the observation that we can often
successfully predict what others will do suggests that we are at least
“translucent.” Furthermore agents of larger scale, like
firms or countries, which may have to publicly deliberate before
acting, may be more transparent than we are. Thus there may be some
theoretical interest in investigations of PDs with transparent
players. Such players could presumably execute conditional strategies
more sophisticated than those of the  extended game
players, strategies, for example that are conditional on the
conditional strategies employed by others. There is some difficulty,
however, in determining exactly what strategies are feasible for such
players. Suppose Row adopted the strategy “do the same as
Column” and Column adopted the strategy “do the opposite
of Row”. There is no way that both these strategies could be
satisfied. On the other hand, if each adopted the strategy
“imitate the other player”, there are two ways the
strategies could be satisfied, and there is no way to determine which
of the two they would adopt. Nigel Howard, who was probably the first
to study such conditional strategies systematically, avoided this
difficulty by insisting on a rigidly typed hierarchy of games. At the
base level we have the ordinary PD game, where each player chooses
between \ and \. For any game \ in the hierarchy we
can generate two new games \ and \. In \, Column has
the same moves as in game \ and Row can choose any function that
assigns \ or \ to each of Column's possible moves.
Similarly in \, Row has the same moves as in \ and Column has
a new set of conditional moves. For example, if [PD] is the base level
game, then \[PD] is the game in which Column can choose from among
the strategies \, \, \ and \ mentioned
above. Howard observed that in the two third level games \[PD]
and \[PD]  there is an
equilibrium outcome giving each player \. In particular, such an
equilibrium is reached when one player plays \ and the other
cooperates when his opponent plays \ and defects when his
opponent plays \, \ or \. Notice that this last
strategy is tantamount to Danielson's
reciprocal cooperation
described in the last section.
The lesson of all this for rational action is not clear. Suppose two
players in a PD were sufficiently transparent to employ the
conditional strategies of higher level games. How do they decide what
level game to play? Who chooses the imitation move and who chooses
reciprocal cooperation? To make a move in a higher level game is
presumably to form an intention observable by the other player. But
why should either player expect the intention to be carried out if
there is benefit in ignoring it?
Conditional strategies have a more convincing application when we take
our inquiry as directed, not towards playing the PD, but as designing
agents who would play it well with a variety of likely opponents. This
is the viewpoint of Danielson.  A conditional strategy is
not an intention that a player forms as a move in a game, but a
deterministic algorithm defining a kind of player. Indeed, one of the
lessons of the PD may be that transparent agents are better off if
they can form irrevocable “action protocols” rather than
always following the intentions they may form at the time of action.
Danielson does not limit himself
a priori
to strategies
within Howard's hierarchy. An agent is simply a computer program,
which can contain lines permitting other programs to read and execute
it. We could easily write two such programs, each designed to
determine whether its opponent plays \ or \ and to do the
opposite. What happens when these two play a PD depends on the details
of implementation, but it is likely that they will be
“incoherent,” i.e., they will enter endless loops and be
unable to make any move at all. To be successful a program
should
be able to move when paired with a variety of other
programs, including copies of itself, and it should be able to get
valuable outcomes. Programs implementing \ and \ in a
straightforward way are not likely to succeed because when paired with
each other they will be incoherent. Programs implementing \ are
not likely to succeed because they get only \ when paired with
their clones. Those implementing \ are not likely to succeed
because they get only \ when paired with programs that recognize
and exploit their unconditionally cooperative nature. There is some
vagueness in the criteria of success. In Howard's scheme we could
compare a conditional strategy with all the possible alternatives of
that level. Here, where any two programs can be paired, that approach
is senseless. Nevertheless, certain programs seem to do well when
paired with a wide variety of players. One is a version of the
strategy that Gauthier has advocated as
constrained
maximization
. The idea is that a player \ should cooperate if
the other would cooperate if \ did, and defect otherwise. As
stated, this appears to be a strategy for the \[PD] or \[PD]
games. It is not clear how a program implementing it would move  when paired with itself. Danielson is able to
construct an approximation to
constrained maximization
,
however, that does cooperate with itself. Danielson's program  cannot be
coherently paired with everything. Nevertheless it does move and score
well against familiar strategies. It cooperates with \ and
itself and it defects against \. If it is coherently paired it
seems guaranteed a payoff no worse than \.
A second successful program models Danielson's
reciprocal
cooperation
. Again, it is not clear that the strategy  allows it to cooperate  with
itself, but Danielson is able to construct an approximation that does.
The 
reciprocal cooperation
does as well as

constrained maximization
against itself,
\ and
constrained maximization
. Against \ it
does even better, getting \ where
constrained
maximization
got only \.
11. Finite Iteration
Many of the situations that are alleged to have the structure of the
PD, like defense appropriations of military rivals or price setting
for duopolistic firms, are better modeled by an iterated version of
the game in which players play the PD repeatedly, retaining access at
each round to the results of all previous rounds. In these iterated
PDs  players who defect in one round can be
“punished” by defections in subsequent rounds and those
who cooperate can be rewarded by cooperation. Thus the appropriate
strategy for rationally self-interested players is no longer obvious.
The theoretical answer to this question, it turns out, depends
strongly on the definition of IPD employed and the knowledge
attributed to rational players.
An IPD can be represented in extensive form by a tree diagram like the
one for the farmer's dilemma above.
Figure 6
Here we have an IPD of length two. The end of each of the two rounds
of the game is marked by a dotted vertical line. The payoffs to each
of the two players  are listed at the end of each path through the tree. The
representation differs from the previous one in that the two nodes on
each branch within the same division mark simultaneous choices by the
two players. Since neither player knows the move of the other at the
same round, the IPD does not qualify as one of the game theorist's
standard “games of perfect information.” If the players
move in succession rather than simultaneously , the resulting game is an
iterated farmer's dilemma, which does meet the game theorist's
definition and which shares many of the features that make the IPD
interesting.
Like the farmer's dilemma, an IPD can, in theory, be represented in
normal form by taking the players' moves to be
strategies
telling them how to move if they should reach any node at the end of a
round of the game tree. The number of strategies increases very
rapidly with the length of the game so that it is impossible in
practice to write out the normal form for all but the shortest IPD's.
Every pair of strategies determines a “play” of the game,
i.e., a path through the extensive-form tree.
In a game like this, the notion of nash equilibrium loses some of its
privileged status. Recall that a pair of moves is a nash equilibrium
if each is a best reply to the other. Let us extend the notation used
in the discussion of the asynchronous PD and let \ be the
strategy that calls for defection at every node of an IPD. It is easy
to see that \ and \ form a nash equilibrium. But against
\, a strategy that calls for defection unless the other player
cooperated at, say, the fifteenth node, would determine the same play
 as \ itself does. The
components that call for cooperation never come into play, because the
other player does not cooperate on the fifteenth  move.
Similarly, a strategy calling for cooperation only after the second
cooperation by itself does equally well. Thus these strategies and
many others form nash equilibria with \. There is a sense in
which these strategies are clearly not equally rational. Although they
yield the same payoffs at the nodes along the path representing the
actual play, they would not yield the same payoffs if other nodes had
been reached. If Player One
had
cooperated in the past, that
would still provide no good reason for him to cooperate now. A nash
equilibrium requires only that the two strategies are best replies to
each other as the game actually develops. A stronger solution concept
for extensive-form games requires that the two strategies would still
be best replies to each other no matter what node on the game tree
were reached. This notion of
subgame-perfect equilibrium
is
defined and defended in Selten 1975. It can be expressed by saying
that the strategy-pair is a nash equilibrium for every subgame of the
original game, where a subgame is the result of taking a node of the
original game tree as the root, pruning away everything that does not
descend from it.
Given this new, stronger solution concept, we can ask about the
solutions to the IPD. There is a significant theoretical difference on
this matter between IPDs of fixed, finite length, like the one
pictured above, and those of infinite or indefinitely finite length.
In games of the first kind, one can prove by an argument known as
backward induction
that \, \ is the only
subgame perfect equilibrium. Suppose the players know the game will
last exactly \ rounds. Then, no matter what node have been
reached, at round \ the players face an ordinary
 PD, and they will defect. At round \
the players know that, whatever they do now, they will both defect at
the next round. Thus it is rational for them to defect now as well. By
repeating this argument sufficiently many times, the rational players
deduce that they should defect at every node on the tree. Indeed,
since at every node defection is a best response to any move, there
can be no other subgame-perfect equilibria.
In practice, there is not a great difference between how people behave
in long fixed-length IPDs  and those
of indeterminate length. This suggests that some of the rationality
and common knowledge assumptions used in the backward induction
argument  are unrealistic. There is a
considerable literature attempting to formulate the argument
carefully, examine its assumptions, and to see how relaxing
unrealistic assumptions might change the rationally acceptable
strategies in the PD and other games of fixed length. .
Player One's belief that there is a slight chance that Two might
pursue an “irrational” strategy other than continual
defection could make it rational for her to cooperate frequently
herself. Indeed, even if One were certain of Two's rationality, One's
belief that there was some chance that Two believed she harbored such
doubts could have the same effect. Thus the argument for continual
defection in the IPD of fixed length depends on complex iterated
claims of certain knowledge of rationality. An even more unrealistic
assumption, noted by Rabinowicz and others, is that each player
continue to believe that the other will choose rationally on the next
move even after evidence of irrational play on previous moves. For
example, it is assumed that, at the node reached after a long series
of moves , \), …,, \), Player One
will choose \ despite never having done so before.
Some have used these kinds of observation to argue that the backward
induction argument shows that standard assumptions about rationality
 are inconsistent or self-defeating.
For  one way to ensure that a rational
player will doubt one's own rationality is to behave irrationally. In
the fixed-length IPD, for example, Player One may be able to deduce
that, if she were to follow an appropriate “irrational”
strategy, Player Two would rationally react so that they can achieve
mutual cooperation in almost all rounds. So our assumptions seem to
imply both that Player One should continually defect and that she
would do better if she didn't. 
12. The Centipede and the Finite IPD
Many of the issues raised by the fixed-length IPD can be raised in
even starker form by a somewhat simpler game. Consider a PD in which
they punishment payoff is zero. Now iterate the asynchronous version
of this game a fixed number times. Imagine that both players are
restricted to highly “punitive” strategies according to
which, they must always defect against a player who has ever defected.
 The result is a
centipede
game.
A particularly nice realization is given by Sobel 2005. A stack of
\ one-dollar bills lies on a table. Players take turns taking
money from the stack, one or two bills per turn. The game ends when
the stack runs out or one of the players takes two bills . Both players keep what they have taken to that point.
The extensive form of the game with for \ is pictured below.
Figure 7
Presumably the true centipede would contain 100 “legs” and
the general form discussed here should really be called the
“\-tipede.” The game appears to be discussed first in
Rosenthal.
As in the fixed-length PD, a backward induction argument easily
establishes that a rational player should take two bills on his first
move, giving her a payoff of two or three dollars, depending on
whether she moves first or second, and leaving the remainder of the
\ dollars undistributed. In more technical terms, the only nash
equilibria of the game are those where the first player takes two
dollars on the first move and the only subgame perfect equilibrium is
the one in which both players take two dollars on any turn they should
get. Again, common sense and experimental evidence suggest that real
players rarely act in this way and this leads to questions about
exactly what assumptions this kind of argument requires and whether
they are realistic.  The centipede also raises some of the
same questions about cooperation and socially desirable altruism as
does the PD and it is a favorite tool in empirical investigations of
game playing.
13. Infinite Iteration
One way to avoid the dubious conclusion of the backward induction
argument without delving too deeply into conditions of knowledge and
rationality is to consider infinitely repeated PDs. No human agents
can actually play an infinitely repeated game, of course, but the
infinite IPD has been considered an appropriate way to model a series
of interactions in which the participants never have reason to think
the current interaction is their last. In this setting a pair of
strategies determines an infinite path through of the game tree. If
the payoffs of the one-shot game are positive, their total along any
such path is infinite. This makes it somewhat awkward to compare
strategies. In many cases, the average payoff per round approaches a
limit as the number of rounds increases, and so that limit can
conveniently serve as the payoff.  For example, if we confine ourselves to those
strategies that can be implemented by mechanical devices , then the sequence of payoffs to
each player will always, after a finite number of rounds, cycle
repeatedly through a particular finite sequence of payoffs. The limit
of the average payoff per round will then be the average payoff in the
cycle. In recent years, Press and Dyson have shown that for many
purposes, investigation of the infinite IPD can be confined to the
“memory-one” strategies, in which the probability of
cooperating in any round depends only on what happened in the previous
meeting between the strategies. The average payoff per round is again
always well-defined in the limit. The ideas of Press and Dyson have
inspired much new work on the infinite IPD.  Since there is no last round, it is obvious that backward
induction does not apply to the infinite IPD.
14. Indefinite Iteration
Most contemporary investigations the IPD take it to be neither
infinite nor of fixed finite length but rather of indeterminate
length. This is accomplished by including in the game specification a
probability \  such that
at each round the game will continue with probability \.
Alternatively, a “discount factor” \ is applied to the
payoffs after each round so that nearby payoffs are valued more highly
than distant ones. Mathematically, it makes little difference whether
\ is regarded as a probability of continuation or a discount on
payoffs. The value of cooperation at a given stage in an IPD clearly
depends on the odds of meeting one's opponent in later rounds.  As \ approaches zero, the
IPD becomes a one-shot PD, and the value of defection increases. As
\ approaches one the IPD becomes an infinite IPD, and the value of
defection decreases. It is also customary to insist that the game has
the property labeled RCA above, so that 
players do better by cooperating on every round than they would do by
“taking turns” — you cooperate while I defect and
then I cooperate while you defect.
There is an observation, apparently originating in Kavka 1983, and
given more mathematical form in Carroll, that the backward induction
argument applies as long as an upper bound to the length of the game
is common knowledge. For if \ is such an upper bound, then, if the
players were to get to stage \, they would know that it was the
last round and they would defect; if they were to get to stage
\, they would know that their behavior on this round cannot
affect the decision to defect on the next, and so they would defect;
and so on. It seems an easy matter to compute upper bounds on the
number of interactions in real-life situations. For example, since
shopkeeper Jones cannot make more than one sale a second and since he
will live less than a thousand years, he and customer Smith can
calculate  that they cannot possibly conduct more than
\ transactions. It is instructive to examine this argument
more closely in order to dramatize the assumptions made in standard
treatments of the indefinite IPD and other indefinitely repeated
games. Note first that, in an indefinite IPD as described above, there
can be no upper bound on the length of the game. There is, instead,
some fixed probability \ that, at any time in which the game is
still being played, it will continue to be played with probability
\. If the interaction of Smith and Jones were modeled as an
indefinite IPD, therefore, the probability of their interacting in a
thousand years would not be zero, but rather some number greater than
\ where \ is the probability of their interacting again now
and \ is the number of seconds in a thousand years. A more
realistic way to model the interaction might be to allow the value of
\ to decrease as the game progressed. As long as \ always
remains greater than zero, however, it remains true that there can be
no upper bound on the number of possible interactions, i.e., no time
at which the probability of future interactions becomes zero. Suppose,
on the other hand, that there
was
a number \ such that
that there was zero probability of the game's continuing to stage
\. Let \, be the probabilities that game
continues after \. Then
there must be a smallest \ such that \ becomes \.  if not sooner.) Given the standard common
knowledge assumptions that we have been making, the players would know
this value of \, and the IPD would be one of fixed length, and not
an indefinite IPD at all. In the case of the shopkeeper and his
customer, we are to suppose that both know today that their last
interaction will occur, let's say, at noon on June 10th, 2020. The
very plausible idea that we began with, viz., that
some
upper
bounds on the number of interactions are common knowledge, even though
the smallest upper bound is not, is incompatible with the assumption
that we know all the continuation probabilities \ from the
start.
As Becker and Cudd astutely observe, we don't need an upper bound on
the number of possible iterations to make a backward induction
argument for defection possible. If the players know all the values of
\ from the outset, then, as long as the value of \ becomes
and remains sufficiently small, they  can compute a stage
\ at which the risk of future punishment and the chance of future
reward no longer outweighs the benefit of immediate defection. So they
know their opponent will defect at stage \, and the induction
begins. This modification of the Kavka/Carroll argument, however, only
further exposes the implausibility of its assumptions. Not only are
Smith and Jones expected to believe that there is non-zero probability
that they will be interacting in a thousand years, each is expected to
be able to compute the precise day on which future interactions will
become and remain so unlikely that their expected future return is
outweighed by that day's payoff. Furthermore each is expected to
believe that the other has made this computation, and that the other
expects him to have made it, and so on.
Axelrod and
Tit for Tat
The iterated version of the PD was discussed from the time the game
was devised, but interest accelerated after influential publications
of Robert Axelrod in the early eighties. Axelrod invited professional
game theorists to submit computer programs for playing IPDs. All the
programs were entered into a tournament in which each played every
other  hundreds of times. It is easy to see that in a
game like this no strategy is “best” in the sense that its
score would be highest among any group of competitors. If the other
strategies never consider the previous history of interaction in
choosing their next move, it would be best to defect unconditionally.
If the other strategies all begin by cooperating and then
“punish” any defection against themselves by defecting on
all subsequent rounds, then a policy of unconditional cooperation is
better. Nevertheless, as in the transparent game, some strategies have
features that seem to allow them to do well in a variety of
environments. The strategy that scored highest in Axelrod's initial
tournament, Tit for Tat , simply
cooperates on the first round and imitates its opponent's previous
move thereafter. More significant than
TFT
's initial
victory, perhaps, is the fact that it won Axelrod's second tournament,
whose sixty three entrants were all given the results of the first
tournament. In analyzing the his second tournament, Axelrod noted that
each of the entrants could be assigned one of five
“representative” strategies in such a way that a
strategy's success against a set of others can be accurately predicted
by its success against their representative. As a further
demonstration of the strength of
TFT
, he calculated
the scores each strategy would have received in tournaments in which
one of the representative strategies was five times as common as in
the original tournament.
TFT
received the highest
score in all but one of these hypothetical tournaments.
Axelrod attributed the success of
TFT
to four
properties. It is
nice
, meaning that it is never the first to
defect. The eight nice entries in Axelrod's tournament were the eight
highest ranking strategies. It is
retaliatory
, making it
difficult for it to be exploited by the rules that were not nice. It
is
forgiving
, in the sense of being willing to cooperate even
with those who have defected against it . An unforgiving rule is
incapable of ever getting the reward payoff after its opponent has
defected once. And it is
clear
, presumably making it easier
for other strategies to predict its behavior so as to facilitate
mutually beneficial interaction.
Suggestive as Axelrod's discussion is, it is worth noting that the
ideas are not formulated precisely enough to permit a rigorous
demonstration of the supremacy of
TFT
. One doesn't
know, for example, the extent of the class of strategies that might
have the four properties outlined, or what success criteria might be
implied by having them. It is true that if one's opponent is playing
TFT
 then one's maximum payoff is obtained by a strategy that
results in mutual cooperation on every round. Since
TFT
is itself one such strategy this implies that
TFT
forms a nash equilibrium with itself in the space
of all strategies. But that does not particularly distinguish
TFT
, for \, \ is also a nash
equilibrium. Indeed, a “folk theorem” of iterated game
theory  implies that, for any \, \
there is a nash equilibrium in which \ is the fraction of times
that mutual cooperation occurs. Indeed
TFT
is, in
some respects,
worse
than many of these other equilibrium
strategies, because the folk theorem can be sharpened to a similar
result about subgame perfect equilibria.
TFT
is, in
general,
not
subgame perfect. For, were one
TFT
player  to defect
against another in a single round, the second would have done better
as an unconditional cooperator.
Post-Axelrod
After publication of Axelrod, 1984, a number of strategies commonly
thought to improve on
TFT
were identified.  The first of these was Nowak and Sigmond's
Pavlov
, also known as,
Win-Stay
Lose-Shift
, which conditions each
non-initial move on its own previous move as well as its opponent's.
More specifically, it cooperates if it and its opponent previously
moved alike and it defects if they previously moved differently.
Equivalently, it repeats its move after success 
and changes it after failure . Hence the names.
This strategy does well in environments like that of Axelrod's
tournment, but poorly when many unconditional defectors or random
players are present. It is discussed further under the label \
in the sections on error and evolution below. A second family of these
is
Gradual Tit for Tat
.
GrdTFT
differs from
TFT
in two respects. First, it gradually increases
the string of punishing defection responses to each defection by its
opponent. Second, it apologizes for each string of defections by
cooperating in the subsequent two rounds. The first property ensures
that  it will defect with increasing
frequency against a random player. The second ensures that  it will quickly establish a regime of mutual
cooperation with suspicious versions of
TFT
.
Beaufils et al show that the version of
GrdTFT
in
which the string of defections is increased by one each time it is
exploited wins round robin tournaments populated by a selection of
“good” IPD strategies 
that the authors chose after an examination of previous tournaments.
Tzafestas  argues that, in making a each move depend on the
entire prior history of the game,
GrdTFT
incorporates
undesirable memory requirements. She suggests that equal success might
be obtained with an "adaptive" strategy, that tracks a measure of the
opponent's cooperativeness or responsiveness across a narrow window of
recent moves and chooses its move according to whether this measure
 exceeds some threshold. The critique seems misguided:
maintaining a count of prior defections seems no more burdensome than
updating the world variable. Nevertheless Tzafestas is able to show
that one of the strategies she identifies outperforms both
TFT
and
GrdTFT
in the very same
environment that Beaufils had constructed.
In more recent years enthusiasm about
TFT
has been
tempered by increasing skepticism. and Northcott and Alexandrova . Evidence has emerged
that the striking success of
TFT
in Axelrod's
tournaments may be partly due to features particular to Axelrod's
setup. Rapoport et al  suggest that, instead of conducting a
round-robin tournament in which every strategy plays every strategy,
one might divide the initial population of stratgies randomly into
equal-size groups, conduct round-robin tournaments within each group.
and then a championship round-robin tournament among the group
winners. They find that, with the same initial population of
strategies present in Axelrod's first tournament, the strategies
ranked two and six in that tournament both perform considerably better
than top-ranked
TFT
. Kretz  finds that, in
round-robin tournaments among populations of strategies that can only
condition on a small number of prior moves  relative performance of
strategies is sensitive to the payoff values in the PD matrix. .
Equally telling, perhaps, are the results of a more recent tournament
using the same paramters as Axelrod did. To mark the twentieth
anniversary of the publication of Axelrod's book, a number of similar
tournaments were staged at the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computing
in Portland in 2004 and the IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence and Games in Colchester 2005. Kendall et al 2007
describes the tournaments and contains several papers by authors who
submitted winning entries. Most of the tournaments were deliberately
designed to differ significantly from Axelrod's . In the one that most closely replicated Axelrod's tournaments. however,
TFT
finished only fourteenth out of the fifty
strategies submitted.
Of Axelrod's five suggested success criteria, the one that seems most
clearly undermined by the later tournament is
“clarity”.  Neither of the two highest-scoring
strategies,
Adaptive Pavlov
 and
Omega Tit for Tat
 says explicitly that the idea behind
APavlov
was to make an educated guess about what
strategies would be entered, find an accurate, low-cost way to
identify each during the initial stages of the game and then play an
optimal strategy against each strategy so identified. For example, the
strategies
Cu
,
Du
,
GRIM
,
RANDOM
,
TFT
,
TFTT
,
TTFT
, and
P
1
, described in a
supplementary table
,
 had all appeared in previous tournaments. By defecting in round one,
cooperating in round three, and choosing the opposite of one's
opponent's round-one move in round two, one could identify any
opposing strategy from among these nine in three moves. This
identification process would be costly, however, because, by its first
move, it eliminates any opportunity of cooperation with
GRIM
. Li chooses instead to employ
TFT
over the first six rounds as his identifying
strategy, reducing cost at the expense of accuracy and range. It is
worth noting that
TFT
cannot distinguish any pair of
strategies that satisfy Axelrod's niceness condition . This means that it forgoes the chance to exploit
unconditional cooperators. Li's entry won its tournament only because
he guessed correctly that not many unconditional cooperators would be
present. The lesson again is to remember that success depends on
environment.
ΩTFT
plays
TFT
unless its
measures of deadlock or randomness exceed specified thresholds. 
The deadlock measure is intended to check whether
ΩTFT
and its opponent are locked into an
unproductive cycle in which they take turns defecting.  When its
threshold is exceeded the strategy cooperates and resets the
measure.  When the randomness measure exceeds its threshold
ΩTFT
switches to unconditional defection. 
Contrary to what might be expected by its name, randomness grows when
OmegaTFT is repeatedly exploited by an unconditional defector. 
Like
APavlov
, however, the strategy cooperates with
an unconditional cooperator. Details can be found in Slany and
Kienreich .
All the strategies for IPDs mentioned in this entry are summarized in
the
Table of Strategies
mentioned
above.
15. Iteration With Error
In a survey of the field several years after the publication of the
results reported above, Axelrod and Dion, chronicle several successes
of
TFT
and modifications of it. They conclude that
“research has shown that many of Axelrod's findings…can
be generalized to settings that are quite different from the original
two-player iterated prisoner's dilemma game.” But in several
reasonable settings
TFT
has serious drawbacks. One
such case, noted in the Axelrod and Dion survey, is when attempts are
made to incorporate the plausible assumption that players are subject
to errors of execution and perception. There are a number of ways this
can be done. Bendor, for example, considers “noisy
payoffs.” When a player cooperates while its opponent defects,
its payoff is \, where \ is a random variable whose expected
value is \. Each player infers the other's move from its own
payoff, and so if \ is sufficiently high its inference may be
mistaken. Sugden  considers players who have a
certain probability of making an error of execution that is apparent
to them but not their opponents. Such players can adopt strategies by
which they “atone” for mistaken defections by being more
cooperative on later rounds than they would be after intended
defection. Assuming that players themselves cannot distinguish a
mistaken move or observation from a real one, however, the simplest
way to model the inevitability of error is simply to forbid completely
deterministic strategies like
TFT
, replacing them
with “imperfect” counterparts, like “imitate the
other player's last move with 99% probability and oppose it with 1%
probability.”
Imperfect TFT
is much less
attractive than its deterministic sibling, because when two
imperfect TFT
strategies play each other, an
“error” by either one will set off a long chain of moves
in which the players take turns defecting. In a long iterated game
between two
imperfect TFT
's with any probability
\ of error, \, players will approach
the same average payoffs as in a game between two strategies that
choose randomly between cooperation and defection, namely
\\). That is considerably worse than the payoff
of \, that results when \.
The predominant view seems to be that, when imperfection is
inevitable, successful strategies will have to be more forgiving of
defections by their opponents . Molander 1985 demonstrates that strategies that mix
TFT
with \ do approach a payoff of \ as
the probability of error approaches zero. When these mixes play each
other, they benefit from higher ratios of \ to
TFT
, but if they become too generous, they risk
exploitation by “stingy” strategies that mix
TFT
with defection. Molander calculates that when the
mix is set so that, following a defection, one cooperates with
probability \ = \min\{1-/, /\}\),
the generous strategies will get the highest score with each other
that is possible without allowing stingy strategies to do better
against them than
TFT
does. Following Nowak and
Sigmund, we label this strategy
generous TFT
, or
GTFT
. When payoffs have the common values 5,3,1,0 ,
GTFT
cooperates after every
instance of an opponent's cooperation and after 25% of an opponent's
defections.
The idea that the presence of imperfection induces greater forgiveness
or generosity is only plausible for low levels of imperfection. As the
level of imperfection approaches \,
Imperfect
TFT
becomes indistinguishable from the random strategy, for
which the very ungenerous \ is the best reply. A simulation by
Kollock seems to confirm that at high levels of imperfection, more
stinginess is better policy than more forgiveness. But Bendor, Kramer
and Swistak note that the strategies employed in the Kollock
simulation are not representative and so the results must be
interpreted with caution.
A second idea is that an imperfect environment encourages strategies
to observe their opponent's play more carefully. In a tournament
similar to Axelrod's  in which each player's moves were
subject to a 10% chance of alteration,
TFT
finished
sixth out twenty-one strategies. As might have predicted on the
dominant view, it was beaten by the more generous
Tit-for-Two-Tats
, aka
TFTT
. It was also
beaten, however, by two versions of
Downing
, a
program that bases each new move on its best estimate how responsive
its opponent has been to its previous moves. In Axelrod's two original
tournaments,
Downing
had ranked near the bottom third
of the programs submitted. Bendor  demonstrates deductively that
against imperfect strategies there are advantages to basing one's
probability of defection on longer histories than does
TFT
.
One clever implementation of the idea that a strategies in an
imperfect environment should pay attention to their previous
interactions is the family of “Pavlovian” strategies
investigated by Kraines and Kraines. For each natural number \,
\-Pavlov, or \, adjusts its probability of cooperation in
units of \, according to how well it fared on the
previous round. More precisely, if \ was cooperating with
probability \ on the last round, then on this round it will
cooperate with probability \ if it received the
reward payoff on the previous round, \ if it
received the punishment payoff, \ if it received
the temptation payoff, and \ if it received the
sucker payoff. \ and \ are bounded addition and
subtraction, i.e., \ is the sum \ unless that number
exceeds one, in which case it is one , and \ is similarly either
\ or close to zero. Strictly speaking, \ is not fully
specified until an initial probability of cooperation is given, but
for most purposes the value of that parameter becomes insignificant in
sufficiently long games and can be safely ignored. It may appear that
\ requires far more computational resources to implement than,
say,
TFT
. Each move for the latter depends on only on
its opponent's last move, whereas each move for \ is a
function of the entire history of previous moves of both players.
\, however, can always calculate its next move by tracking
only its current probability of cooperation and its last payoff. As
its authors maintain, this seems like “a natural strategy in the
animal world.” One can calculate that for \, \
does better against the random strategy than does
TFT
. More generally, \ does as well or better
than
TFT
against the generous unresponsive strategies
Cp
that always cooperate with fixed probability \  In these cases the
“slow learner” versions of Pavlov with higher values of
\ do slightly better than the “fast learners” with low
values. Against responsive strategies, like other Pavlovian strategies
and
TFT
, \ and its opponent eventually reach
a state of  constant cooperation. The total payoff is then
inversely related to the “training time,” i.e., the number
of rounds required to reach that state. Since training time of
\ varies exponentially with \, Kraines and Kraines
maintain that \ or \ are to be preferred to other
Pavlovian strategies, and are close to “ideal” IPD
strategies. It should be noted, however, that when 
TFT
plays itself, no training time at all is
required, whereas when a Pavlovian strategy plays
TFT
or another Pavlov, the training time can be large. Thus the cogency of
the argument for the superiority of
Pavlov
over
TFT
depends on the observation that its performance
shows less degradation when subject to imperfections. It is also worth
remembering that no strategy is best in every environment, and the
criteria used in defense of various strategies in the IPD are vague
and heterogeneous. One advantage of the evolutionary versions of the
IPD discussed in the next section is that they permit more careful
formulation and evaluation of success criteria.
16. Evolution
Perhaps the most active area of research on the PD concerns
evolutionary versions of the game. A population of players employing
various strategies play IPDs among themselves. The lower scoring
strategies decrease in number, the higher scoring increase, and the
process is repeated. Thus success in an evolutionary PD , requires doing well with other successful strategies, rather
than doing well with a wide range of strategies.
The initial population in an EPD can be represented by a set of pairs
\, \ldots \}\) where \ are the
proportions of the population playing strategies \, respectively. The description of EPDs given above does not
specify exactly how the population of strategies is to be
reconstituted after each IPD. The usual assumption, and the most
sensible one for biological applications, is that a score in any round
indicates the relative number of “offspring” in the next.
It is assumed that the size of the entire population stays fixed, so
that births of more successful strategies are exactly offset by deaths
of less successful ones. This amounts to the condition that the
proportion \ of each strategy \ in the successor
population is determined by the equation \\),
where \ is the score of \ in the previous round and \
is the average of all scores in the population. Thus every strategy
that scores above the population average will increase in number and
every one that scores below the average will decrease. This kind of
evolution is referred to as “replicator dynamics” or
evolution according to the “proportional fitness” rule.
Other rules of evolution are possible. Bendor and Swistak argue that,
for social applications, it makes more sense to think of the players
as switching from one strategy to another rather than as coming into
and of existence. Since rational players would presumably switch only
to strategies that received the highest payoff in previous rounds,
only the highest scoring strategies would increase in numbers. Batali
and Kitcher employ a dynamics in which lowest scoring strategies are
replaced by strategies that mix characteristics of the highest scoring
strategies. A variety of other possible evolutionary dynamics are
described and compared in Kuhn 2004. Discussion here, however, will
primarily concern EPDs with the proportional fitness rule.
Axelrod, borrowing from Trivers and Maynard Smith, includes a
description of the EPD with proportional fitness, and a brief analysis
of the evolutionary version of his IPD tournament. For Axelrod, the
EPD provides one more piece of evidence in favor of
TFT
:
TIT FOR TAT had a very slight lead in the original tournament, and
never lost this lead in simulated generations. By the one-thousandth
generation it was the most successful rule and still growing at a
faster rate than any other rule.
Axelrod's EPD tournament, however, incorporated several features that
might be deemed artificial. First, it permitted deterministic
strategies in a noise-free environment. As noted above,
TFT
can be expected to do worse under conditions that
model the inevitability of error. Second, it began with only the 63
strategies from the original IPD tournament. Success against
strategies concocted in the ivory tower may not imply success against
all those that might be found in nature. Third, the only strategies
permitted to compete at a given stage were the survivors from the
previous stage. A more realistic model, one might argue, would allow
new “mutant” strategies to enter the game at any stage.
Changing this third feature might well be expected to hurt
TFT
. For a large growth in the
TFT
population would make it possible for mutants employing more naive
strategies like \ to regain a foothold, and the presence of
these naifs in the population might favor nastier strategies like
\ over
TFT
.
Nowak and Sigmund simulated two kinds of tournaments that avoid the
three questionable features. The first examined the family of
“reactive” strategies. For any probabilities \, \,
and \, \\) is the strategy of cooperating with
probability \ in the first round and thereafter with probability
\ if the other player has cooperated in the previous round, and
with probability \ if she has defected. This is a broad family,
including many of the strategies already considered. \,
\,
TFT
, and
Cp
are
\\), \\), \\), and \\).
GTFT
, when payoffs are \, is
\\). To capture the inevitability of error, Nowak and
Sigmund exclude the deterministic strategies, where \ and \
are exactly \ or \, from their tournaments. As before, if the
game is sufficiently long  and \ are not integers), the
first move can be ignored and a reactive strategy can be identified
with its \ and \ values. Particular attention is paid to the
strategies close to Molander's
GTFT
described above,
where \ and \/, /\}\). The
first series of Nowak and Sigmund's EPD tournaments begin with
representative samples of reactive strategies. For most such
tournaments, they found that evolution led irreversibly to \.
Those strategies \\) closest to \\) thrived while
the others perished. When one of the initial strategies is very close
to
TFT
, however, the outcome changes.
TFT and all other reciprocating strategies \)) seem to
have disappeared. But an embattled minority remains and fights back.
The tide turns when ‘suckers’ are so decimated that
exploiters can no longer feed on them. Slowly at first, but gathering
momentum, the reciprocators come back, and the exploiters now wane.
But the
TFT
-like strategy that caused this reversal
of fortune is not going to profit from it: having eliminated the
exploiters, it is robbed of its mission and superseded by the strategy
closest to
GTFT
. Evolution then stops. Even if we
introduce occasionally 1% of another strategy it will vanish.
On the basis of their tournaments among reactive strategies, Nowak and
Sigmund conjectured that, while
TFT
is essential for
the emergence of cooperation, the strategy that actually underlies
persistent patterns of cooperation in the biological world is more
likely to be
GTFT
.
A second series of simulations with a wider class of strategies,
however, forced them to revise their opinion. The strategies
considered in the second series allowed each player to base its
probability of cooperation on its own previous move as well as its
opponent's. A strategy can now be represented as \\) where \ are the probabilities of
cooperating after outcomes \\), \\), \\), and \\), respectively i.e., after receiving the
reward, sucker, temptation and punishment payoffs.  s are not zero or one.) The initial population in these
tournaments all play the random strategy \\) and
after every 100 generations a small amount of a randomly chosen
 mutant is introduced, and the population evolves
by proportional fitness. The results are quite different than before.
After \ generations, a state of steady mutual cooperation was
reached in \ of the simulation trials. But less than \
of these states were populated by players using
TFT
or
GTFT
. The remaining \ were dominated by
strategies close to \\). This is the just the Pavlovian
strategy \ of Kraines and Kraines, which replays its last move
after receiving \ or \ and changes to the other move after
receiving \ or \. Kraines and Kraines had been somewhat
dismissive of \. They recall that Rapoport and Chammah, who
identified it early in the history of game theory had labeled it
“simpleton” and remark that “the appellation is well
deserved”. Indeed, \ has the unfortunate characteristic
of trying to cooperate with \ on every other turn, and against
TFT
it can get locked into the inferior repeating
series of payoffs \. But Nowak and Sigmund
rename the strategy “win-stay lose-shift” and trumpet its
advantages. Their simulations suggest that the defects mentioned here
do not matter very much in evolutionary contexts. One reason may be
that \ helps to make its environment unsuitable for its
enemies. \ does well in an environment with generous
strategies, like \ or
GTFT
.
TFT
, as we have seen, allows these strategies to
flourish, which could pave the way for \. Thus, although
TFT
fares less badly against \ than \
does, \ is better at keeping its environment free of
\.
Simulations in a universe of deterministic strategies yield results
quite different than those of Nowak and Sigmund. Bruce Linster  suggests that natural classes of strategies and realistic
mechanisms of evolution can be defined by representing strategies as
simple
Moore machines
. For example, \ is represented
by the machine pictured below.
Figure 8
This machine has two states, indicated by circles. It begins in the
leftmost state. The \ in the left circle means that the machine
cooperates on the first move. The arrow leading from the left to the
right circle indicates that machine defects ) after
it has cooperated  state) and its opponent has
defected ). Linster has conducted
simulations of evolutionary PD's among the strategies that can be
represented by two-state Moore machines. It turns out that these are
exactly the deterministic versions of the \ strategies of Nowak
and Sigmund. Since the strategies are deterministic, we must
distinguish between the versions that cooperate on the first round and
those that defect on the first round. Among the first round
cooperators, \, \bS, \bS\) and
\\) all represent the strategy \ of unconditional
cooperation. Similarly, four of the first-round defectors all
represent \. Each of the other \\),
where \ are either zero or one represent unique
strategies, and each comes in two varieties according to whether it
cooperates or defects in round one. By deleting the six duplicates
from these thirty-two deterministic versions of Nowak and Sigmund's
strategies, we obtain the twenty-six “two-state”
strategies considered by Linster.
Linster simulated a variety of EPD tournaments among the two-state
strategies. Some used “uniform mutation” in which each
strategy in the population has an equal probability \ of mutating
into any of the other strategies. Some used “stylized
mutation” in which the only mutations permitted are those that
can be understood as the result of a single “broken link”
in the Moore machine diagrams. In some, mutations were assumed to
occur to a tiny proportion of the population at each generation; in
others the “mutants” represented an invading force
amounting to one percent of the original population. In some, a
penalty was levied for increased complexity in the form of reduced
payoffs for machines requiring more states or more links. As one might
expect, results vary somewhat depending on conditions. There are some
striking differences, however, between all of Linster's results and
those of Nowak and Sigmund. In Linster's tournaments, no single
strategy ever dominated the surviving populations in the way that
\ and
GTFT
did in Nowak and Sigmund's. The
one strategy that did generally come to comprise over fifty percent of
the population was the initially-cooperating version of
\\). This is a strategy whose imperfect variants seem to
have been remarkably uncompetitive for Nowak and Sigmund. It has been
frequently discussed in the game theory literature under the label
GRIM
or
TRIGGER
. It cooperates until
its opponent has defected once, and then defects for the rest of the
game. According to Skyrms  and Vanderschraaf, both Hobbes and
Hume identified it as the strategy that underlies our cooperative
behavior in important PD-like situations. The explanation for the
discrepancy between
GRIM's
strong performance for
Linster and its poor performance for Nowak and Sigmund probably has to
do with its sharp deterioration in the presence of error. In a match
between two imperfect
GRIM
s, an
“erronious” defection by either leads to a long string of
mutual defections. Thus, in the long run imperfect
GRIM
does poorly against itself. The other strategies
that survived  Linster's tournaments are
TFT
, \, \, and the
initially-cooperative \\).  The observation that evolution might lead to a
stable mix of strategies  rather than a single dominant
strategy is suggestive. Equally suggestive is the result obtained
under a few special conditions in which evolution leads to a recurring
cycle of population mixes.
One might expect it to be possible to predict the strategies that will
prevail in EPDs meeting various conditions, and to justify such
predictions by formal proofs. Until recently, however, mathematical
analyses of the EPD have been plagued by conceptual confusions about
“evolutionary stability,” the condition under which, as
Nowak and Sigmund say, “evolution stops”. Axelrod and
Axelrod & Hamilton claim to show that
TFT
is
evolutionarily stable. Selten 1983, includes an example of a game with
no evolutionarily stable strategy, and Selten's argument that there is
no such strategy clearly applies to the
EPD
and other
evolutionary games. Boyd and Lorberbaum and Farrell and Ware present
still different proofs demonstrating that no strategies for the
EPD
are evolutionarily stable. Unsurprisingly, the
paradox is resolved by observing that the three groups of authors each
employ slightly different conceptions of evolutionary stability. The
conceptual tangle is unraveled in a series of papers by Bendor and
Swistak. Two central stability concepts are described and applied to
the EPD below. Readers who wish to compare these with some others that
appear in the literature may consult the following brief guide:
Concepts of Stability in Evolutionary Games
.
A strategy \ for an evolutionary game has
universal strong
narrow stability
 if a population
playing strategy \ will, under any rule of evolution, drive to
extinction any sufficiently small group of invaders all of which play
the same strategy. An evolutionary game has usn-stability just in case
it meets a simple condition on payoffs identified by Maynard
Smith:

For all strategies
\, \ \gt V\) or both \ =
V\) and \ \gt V\).
\) indicates the
payoff to strategy \ when \ plays \.) MS says that
any invaders do strictly worse against the natives than the natives
themselves do against the natives or else they get exactly the same
payoff against the natives as the natives themselves do, but the
native does better against the invader than the invader himself
does.
For any strategy \ in the IPD , however, there are strategies \ different from \
such that \ mimics the way \ plays when it plays against
\ or \. The existence of these “neutral
mutants” implies that MS cannot be satisfied and so no EPD has
usn-stability. This argument, of course, uses the assumption that any
strategy in the iterated game is a possible invader. There may be good
reason to restrict the available strategies. For example, if the
players are assumed to have no knowledge of previous interactions,
then it may be appropriate to restrict available strategies to the
unconditional ones. Since a pair of players then get the same payoffs
in every round of an iterated game, we may as well take each round of
the evolutionary game to be one-shot games between every pair of
players rather than iterated games. Indeed, this is the kind of
evolutionary game that Maynard Smith himself considered. In this
framework, any strategy \ such that \\) is a strict
nash equilibrium in the underlying one-shot game  meets the MS condition. Thus MS and
usn-stability are non-trivial conditions in some contexts.
A strategy \ has
restricted weak broad stability)
 if, when evolution proceeds according to the
proportional fitness rule and the native population is playing
\, any  group of invaders of
sufficiently small size will fail to drive the natives to extinction.
This condition turns out to be equivalent to a weakened version of MS
identified by Bendor and Swistak.

For all strategies
\, \ \gt V\) or both \ =
V\) and \ \ge V\).
BS and rwb-stability are non-trivial conditions in the more general
evolutionary framework: strategies for the EPD that satisfy
rwb-stability do exist. This does not particularly vindicate any of
the strategies discussed above, however. Bendor and Swistak prove a
result analogous to the folk theorem mentioned previously: If the
shadow of the future is sufficiently large, there are rwb-stable
strategies supporting any degree of cooperation from zero to one. One
way to distinguish among the strategies that meet BS is by the size of
the invasion required to overturn the natives, or, equivalently, by
the proportion of natives required to maintain stability. Bendor and
Swistak show that this number, the
minimal stabilizing
frequency
, never exceeds 1/2: no population can resist every
invading group as large as itself. They maintain that this result does
allow them to begin to provide a theoretical justification for
Axelrod's claims. They are able to show that, as the shadow of the
future approaches one, any strategy that is nice  and retaliatory  has a minimal
stabilizing frequency approaching one half.
TFT
has
both these properties and, in fact, they are the first two of the four
properties Axelrod cited as instrumental to
TFT
's
success. There are, of course, many other nice and retaliatory
strategies, and there are strategies ) that are not
retaliatory but still satisfy rwb-stability. But Bendor and Swistak
are at least able to show that any “maximally robust”
strategy, i.e., any strategy whose minimum stabilizing frequency
approaches one half, chooses cooperation on all but a finite number of
moves in an infinitely repeated PD.
Bendor and Swistak's results must be interpreted with some care.
First, one should keep in mind that no probabilistic or
noise-sensitive strategies can fit the definitions of either
“nice” or “retaliatory” strategies.
Furthermore, imperfect versions of
TFT
do not satisfy
rwb-stability. They can be overthrown by arbitrarily small invasions
of deterministic
TFT
or, indeed, by arbitrary small
invasions of any less imperfect
TFT
. Second, one must
remember that the results about minimal stabilizing frequencies only
concern weak stability. If the number of generations is large compared
with the original population , a population that is initially composed entirely of
players employing the same maximally robust strategy, could well admit
a sequence of small invading groups that eventually reduces the
original strategy to less than half of the population. At that point
the original strategy could be overthrown.
It is likely that both of these caveats play some role in explaining
an apparent discrepancy between the Bendor/Swistak results and the
Nowak/Sigmund simulations. One would expect Bendor/Swistak's minimal
stabilizing frequency to provide some indication of the length of time
that a population plays a particular strategy. A strategy requiring a
large invasion to overturn is likely to prevail longer than a strategy
requiring only a small invasion. A straightforward calculation reveals
that \ has a relatively low minimum stabilizing frequency. It
is overturned by invasions of unconditional defectors exceeding
\ of the population. Yet in the Nowak/Sigmund simulations,
\-like strategies predominate over
TFT
-like
strategies. Since the simulations required imperfection and since they
generated a sequence of mutants vastly larger than the original
population, there is no real contradiction here. Nevertheless the
discrepancy suggests that we do not yet have a theoretical
understanding of EPDs sufficient to predict the strategies that will
emerge under various plausible conditions.
Like usn-stability, the concept of rwb-stability can be more
discriminating if it is relativized to a particular set of strategies.
Molander's 1992 investigation of Schelling's many-person version of
the PD, for example, restricts attention to the family
\ of
TFT
-like stratgies. A
player adopting \ cooperates on the first round and on every
subsequent round after at least \ others cooperate. By construing
stability as resistance to invasions by other family members, Molander
is able to show that there are conditions under which a particular mix
of two of the \'s ) is uniquely
stable. The significance of results like these, however, depends on
the plausibility of such limitations on the set of permissible
strategies.
Evolution and the Optional PD
In iterated and evolutionary versions of the optional PD, we imagine
that players from some population are repeatedly paired off and given
the opportunity to play the PD  or \) or
to opt out ). In choosing \, a player forgoes
the opportunity of receiving the reward or temptation payoffs until
the next pairing. In most human interactions that come to mind, a
refusal to engage with a particular partner does not represent quite
the same loss of opportunity to engage with another as a choice to
engage does. If I buy a car from an unscrupulous dealer, I'll have to
wait a long time before my next car purchase to do better; but if I
refuse to engage with her I can immediately begin negotiating with a
neighboring dealer. Nevertheless, there may be situations among people
 that are appropriately modeled by evolutionary versions
of the optional PD.
We can represent the strategies for the evolutionary optional PD that
do not require memory of previous interaction as triples \, where \, \ and \ are real numbers adding
to one, representing the probability of playing \, \ and
\. None of these strategies meets the BS condition, and so no
strategy is rwb-stable within this family. If all the members of a
group unconditionally refuse to engage ), then they can be infiltrated and eventually replaced by
small invasions of more cooperative strategies. The cooperative
strategies, in turn, will be overthrown by defecting strategies, and,
when the concentration of defectors is sufficiently great, the
“loners” who refuse to engage can again take over. Adding
the option of not-playing to the evolutionary PD does permit escape
from from the unhappy state of universal defection, but leads to an
only slightly less undesirable outcome in which a population cycles
repeatedly through states of universal non-engagement. 
Among strategies that do allow dependence on previous interaction,
Batali and Kitcher like an analog of
GRIM
that they
call
Discriminating Altruist
.
DA
cooperates with any player
that has never defected against it, and otherwise refuses to engage.
They show that, among a group of five simple strategies, there will be
a cyclic pattern like that described above in which
“anti-social”  strategies are replaced by
“asocial”  strategies, which are replaced in
turn by “social”  strategies, which are replaced again
by “anti-social” strategies. Their analysis, however,
leads them to conclude that if members of a population are restricted
to these five strategies, evolution will lead them to spend
“most of their time in states of high cooperation,”
. Simulations among agents
who are permitted any strategies where a move depend on the two
previous moves of its opponent are said to provide rough
corroboration. Some caution is in order here. There is little analysis
of which strategies underlie the cooperating populations in the
simulations and, indeed,
DA
is not an option for an
agent whose memory goes back only two games. Oddly, slightly
less
cooperativity is reported for the fully optional version
of the game than for the semi-optional . The evolutionary dynamics employed and the measures of
cooperativity employed are sufficiently idiosyncratic to make
comparisons with other work difficult. Despite all these caveats, it
seems safe to conclude that taking engagement to be optional can
provide another explanation for the fact that universal, unrelenting
defection is rarely seen in patterns of interaction sometimes modeled
as evolutionary PDs.
17. Signaling
When Kendall et al began organizing their IPD tournaments to mark the
20th anniversary of the publication of Axelrod's influential book,
they received an innocent-seeming inquiry: could one entrant make
multiple submissions? If they did not immediately realize the
significance of this question, they must surely have done so when a
group from the Technical University of Graz attempted to enter more
than 10,000 individually named strategies to the first tournament.
Most of these aspiring entries were disallowed. As it turned out,
however, the winning strategy came from a group from the University of
Southhampton who themselves submitted over half of the 223 strategies
that were allowed. As the groups from Graz and Southhampton realized
,
a good way to win a round-robin IPD is to accompany one's entrant with
an army of “enablers” that boost its score relative to
others. In extreme form, the master strategy and its enablers begin by
playing a short code sequence of \ and \ moves by which
each can be identified by either. Thereafter the enablers always
cooperate against the master  and
defect against all others . The master defects against the enablers and plays a
reasonable strategy  against all others.
Under these circumstances the score of the master depends on only two
factors: the size of its enabling army, and the accuracy and cost of
the identifying code sequence. Accuracy is less than perfect if an
outside strategy “accidentally” begins a game with the
code sequence. Cost is the payoff value lost by using early moves to
signal one's identity rather than to follow a more productive
strategy. Longer codes produce greater accuracy at greater cost.
Coming to a better appreciation of these ideas, Kendall et al
organized additional tournaments in 2005, one restricting each author
to a single entry and another restricting each author to a team of
twenty entries 
One may well wonder whether this sort of signaling and team play has
any importance beyond showing competitive scholars how to win
round-robin IPD tournaments. In an evolutionary setting armies of
enablers would rapidly head towards extinction, leaving a master
strategy to face its high-scoring competitors alone. There are, of
course, examples among both animal species and human societies of
successful “teams” among which large numbers are exploited
for the benefit of few. Presumably, in these cases the exploiters
transfer enough to the exploited to ensure the latter's continued
availability. Perhaps such payoff transfers within teams should be
permitted in IPD tournaments intended to explore these issues. Even
without such rule changes, however, there are less extreme forms of
team play that would perform better in an evolutionary setting. If one
allows enablers to recognize and cooperate with one another, they will
gain considerably with no loss to their master, except when an enabler
wrongly identified an outsider as one of its kind. If one allowed them
to play reasonable strategies against outsiders they would gain still
more, though the risk to their master  would
be considerably greater. Even without allowing themselves to be
exploited by a master, teams could benefit by playing \ among
themselves and \ with outsiders, or \ among themselves and
a reasonable strategy against outsiders. Slany and Kienreich  label these approaches EW, EP, DW, and DP and observe  that for teams of equal and sufficiently large size
this order mirrors the order of the best-performing member of the team
from best to worst.
The possibility of error raises special difficulties for team play
with signaling of this kind: an incorrect signal could be accidentally
sent, or a correct signal could be misintepreted. Rogers et al  realized that the problem of sending and receiving
signals when error is possible is a well-studied problem in computer
science: reliable communication over a noisy channel. In both 2004 and
2005 one of the IPD tournaments organized by Kendall et al introduced
noise to simulate the possibility of error. By employing some of the
standard error-correcting codes designed to deal with communication
over a noisy channel as their signaling protocol, the Southampton
group won both with a comfortable margin.
In IPD tournaments like those of Axelrod and Kendall et al, players
know nothing about each other except their moves in the game, and so
they can use no other information to signal their membership in a
group. In the real world it would seem much more likely that other
avenues of communication would be available. The notion that
cooperative outcomes might be facilitated by such communication among
players is an old idea in game theory. Santos et al show how this
might be possible. Their work borrows from an influential paper by
Arthur Robson . Imagine an evolutionary game, whose underlying
payoff structure may be a stag hunt or a PD, in which all players can
choose only between  moves \ and \. If the
underlying game is a PD the population will stablize with universal
defection.   or everyone playing \
. To illustrate the beneficial possibilities
of communication, let us suppose the former.) Now suppose a small
group of mutants enter the population who make a signal  and play \ against those who
signal and \ against all others. Since these players do as well
as the originals against ousiders and better against themselves, they
will soon take over the population.  against themselves and \ against outsiders.)
So communications does seem to facilitate cooperation. If the
underlying game is a PD, however, once the new uniform cooperating
population has taken over, it is itself vulnerable. It can be invaded
and supplanted by a “deceiving”) invader who signals and
defects against signallers. The resulting population can then be
infiltrated  by other, non-signaling, defectors.
So Robson concluded that signaling could move a population from the
inferior equilibrium to the superior one in an evolutionary stag hunt,
but could only delay the establishment of universal defection in a PD.
Santos et al observe, however, that, if a second signal is available,
the universally defecting population could be supplanted by a small
group of mutants using it as new secret handshake. Of course this
group is itself vulnerable to mutants who mimic the second signal
while defecting against all. In this case however, the resulting dark
age may no longer be permanent. If a mutant group of signal-one
handshakers re-emerges before any signal-one defectors have drifted
into the population, they will again take over, and the cycle will be
repeated.  The story is no longer one where
“evolution stops”: rather the population cycles between
states of universal defection and universal cooperation. The time
spent in each state depends on the payoffs of the PD and the number of
available signals. Santos et al demonstrate, however, that, for finite
populations with sufficiently slow mutation rates and large numbers of
available signals cooperation predominates in EPDs with signaling.
18. Spatial PDs
A previous section discussed a controversial argument that cooperation
is rational in a PD when each player knows that the other is enough
like himself to make it likely that they will choose the same move. An
analog of this argument in the evolutionary context is more obviously
cogent. If agents are not paired at random, but rather are more likely
to play others employing similar strategies, then cooperative behavior
is more likely to emerge.
There are at least three mechanisms by which this kind of
“association” among players can be achieved. One such
mechanism in evolutionary PDs has been widely studied under the label
“spatial PD.” Players are arranged in some
“geographical” arrangement. This may be an array with a
rectangular boundary, for example, or a circle, or surface of a sphere
or surface of a torus with no boundary. From the geographical
arrangement two  kinds of neighborhoods are
identified for each player. Agents meet only those in their
“interaction” neighborhood, and the evolutionary dynamics
considers only the payoffs to those in their “comparison”
neighborhood. Generally, the evolutionary dynamics employed is one of
“winner imitation” within the interaction neighborhood.
 Because both evolution and
interaction are “local,” players are more likely  to meet those playing strategies like their own in an
SPD than they would be in an ordinary evolutionary game. In addition
to the “association” effects, one should also keep in mind
that the outcome of SPDs may be influenced by winner imitation
dynamics, which may drive to extinction strategies that might
survive—and eventually predominate—with the replicator
dynamics more commonly employed in ordinary EPDs.
As usual, the impetus for looking at spatial SPDs seems to come from
Axelrod. Four copies of each of the 63 strategies submitted to
Axelrod's tournament were arranged on a grid with a spherical geometry
so that each cell had four neighbors for both interaction and
comparison. For every initial random distribution, the resulting SPD
eventually reached a state where the strategy in every cell was
cooperating with all its neighbors, at which point no further
evolution is possible. In these end-states only about ten of the 63
original strategies remained. The remaining strategies were no longer
randomly distributed, but segregated into clumps of various sizes.
Axelrod also showed that under special conditions evolution in an SPD
can create successions of complex symmetrical patterns that do not
appear to reach any steady-state equilibrium.
To get an idea of why cooperative behavior might spread in this and
similar frameworks, consider two agents on either side of a frontier
between cooperating and non-cooperating subpopulations. The
cooperative agent sees a cooperative neighbor whose four neighbors all
cooperate, and who therefore gets four times the reward payoff after
playing them all. So he will imitate this neighbor's strategy and
remain cooperative. The non-cooperating agent, on the other hand, sees
his cooperative counterpart, who gets three reward payoffs from his
cooperative neighbors and one sucker payoff. He compares this to the
payoffs of his non-cooperatiave neighbors. The best these can do is to
get three punishments and a temptation. So, as long as \
exceeds \, the non-coperative agent on the frontier will adopt
the strategy of his cooperative neighbor. Axelrod's payoffs of 5, 3, 1
and 0 for \, \, \, and \, do meet this condition.
Nowak and May have investigated in greater detail SPDs in which the
only permitted strategies are \ and \.  They find that, for a variety of spatial configurations and
distributions of strategies, evolution depends on relative payoffs in
a uniform way. When the temptation payoff is sufficiently high,
clusters of \ grow and those of \ shrink; when it is
sufficiently low, the \ clusters shrink and the \
clusters grow. For a narrow range of intermediate values, we get
successions of complex patterns like those noted by Axelrod. The
evolving patterns exhibit great variety. For a given spatial
configuration, however, the ratio \ to \ strategies
seems to approach the same constant value for all initial
distributions of strategies and all temptation payoffs within the
special range. The idea that these simulations partially explain the
persistence of cooperation in nature has been questioned on the
grounds that they assume deterministic  moves and updates.
But the authors report similar phenomena under a variety of
error-conditions, although lower relative temptation values are then
required for the survival of the cooperators, and the level of error
cannot exceed a certain threshold. 
Grim, Mar and St Denis report a number of SPD simulations with a
greater variety of initial strategies. In general their observations
confirm the plausible conjecture that cooperative outcomes are more
common in SPDs than ordinary EPDs. Simulations starting with all of
the pure reactive strategies of Nowak and Sigmund \) described above where \, \, and
\ are either 0 or 1.), all ended with
TFT
—i.e., with \\)—as the only
survivor 
is the sole survivor and ones in which \ and
TFT
are intermixed—are clearly possible.)
Simulations starting with all of the 64 possible pure strategies in
which a move may depend on the opponent's previous
two
moves,
ended with mixed populations of survivors employing a variety of
TFT
-like strategies. They all defect after a double
defection \), though not necessarily after a single
defection \\ or \\); they all cooperate after
a double cooperation, though not necessarily after a single
cooperation; they all cooperate in the second round of the game,
though not necessarily in the first).  Simulations starting with many  evenly
distributed samples of Nowak and Sigmunds mixed reactive strategies,
tended to be taken over by \\), which is a version of
generous
TFT
with less than half the generosity of
GTFT
. Simulations beginning with a random selection
of a few  of these strategies tended to evolve to a mixed
stable or cyclic pattern dominated by a single version of generous
TFT
with considerably more generosity than
GTFT
. \\), which is more than twice as
generous as
GTFT
, seems to have been a frequent
victor.
Szabó and Hauert have investigated spatial versions of the
optional PD in some detail. Among their findings is that, for a
particular  range of payoffs, a population of agents
playing “pure” strategies on a square lattice will evolove
towards a unique equilibrium in which all three strategies are
present. This contrasts with the continuous cycles for the
non-spatialized versions of the evolutionary optional PD's discussed
above. Like the earlier observations, it may help to explain how a
group might achieve a state other than universal defection, but not
how it might achieve a state of universal cooperation.
The “geographical” aspect of SPD's need not be taken too
literally. For social applications, and probably even for many
biological ones, there seems to be no motivation for any particular
geometrical arrangement.  The interest in SPDs presumably lies in
the insight that my “neighborhood” of interaction and my
“neighborhood” of comparison, is much smaller than the
population as a whole even if it turns out not to be limited by
details of physical geography. Nevertheless SPD models of the
evolution of cooperation in particular geometrical arrangements have
given us some suggestive and pretty pictures to contemplate. Several
examples are accessible through the links at the end of this
entry.
19. PDs and Social Networks
One way to make the idea of local interaction more realistic for some
applications is to let agents
choose
the partners with whom
to interact, based on payoffs in past interactions. Skyrms 2004
considers iterated PDs among a population of unconditional cooperators
and defectors. Initially, as usual, each agent chooses a partner at
random from the remaining members of the population. For subsequent
interactions, however, the odds of choosing that partner are adjusted,
according to either the payoffs from previous times that partner was
chosen, or  the payoffs from previous times that
there has been interaction with that partner . In a typical PD, where the payoffs for
temptation, reward, punishment and sucker are 3, 2, 1 and 0, both
cooperators and defectors eventually choose only cooperators. Since
the cooperators are chosen by both cooperators and defectors, they
play more often than the defectors who play only when they are doing
the choosing. If we assume that there is an equal division between
cooperators and defectors, then cooperators can expect a return of one
reward payoff when they are the chooser, and a fifty/fifty mix of of
reward and sucker payoffs when they are the chosen. So their expected
payoff for each interaction will be \/2\). Defectors can expect
a return of one temptation payoff per play, but they play half as
often. With payoff structure indicated, \, and so
cooperators do better, even with this “one-way”
association.
The story may unfold somewhat differently in what Skyrms calls an
“attenuated” PD, where the payoffs are, let us say, 2.01,
2, 1.98, and 0.  Here, as before, the cooperators quickly learn
not to choose defectors as partners. The defectors get roughly the
same payoffs whether they choose cooperators or defectors as partners.
Since they rapidly cease being chosen by cooperators, however, their
returns from interactions with cooperators will be less than returns
from defectors and they will soon limit their choices to other
defectors.  depends on
total
returns from interacting with
\) rather than
average
returns from interacting with
\.) So in the attenuated game we end up with perfect
association: defectors play defectors and cooperators play
cooperators. Since the reward payoff slightly exceeds the punishment
payoff, the cooperators again do better than the defectors.
The social network games considered above are not really evolutionary
PDs in the sense described above. The patterns of interaction evolve,
but the strategy profile of the population remains fixed. It is
natural to allow both strategies and probabilities of interaction to
evolve simultaneously as payoffs are distributed. Whether cooperation
or defection  comes to dominate the population under such
conditions depends on a multitude of factors: the values of the
payoffs, the initial distribution of strategies, the relative speed of
the adjustments in strategy and interaction probabilities, and other
properties of those two evolutionary dynamics. Skyrms 2004 contains a
general discussion and a number of suggestive examples, but it does
not provide  a comprehensive account of social
network PDs or a careful analysis of precise formulations to properly
model particular phenomena. Much remains unknown.
20. Zero-Determinant Strategies
In a social network game, agents choose from a population of potential
opponents; in the version of the IPD that interested Axelrod, agents
must play every other member of the population of which they are a
part. The original description of the IPD by Dresher and Flood,
however, concerned a single pair of players who repeatedly play the
same PD game. In a brief, but influential, paper a pair of
distinguished physicists, William Press and Freeman Dyson, recently
returned attention to this original version of the IPD, or rather to
the infinitely repeated version of it.
Let's call this version of the game the  two-player IPD, or
2IPD. In other versions of the IPD, where pairs from a larger
population come together repeatedly to play the game, a successful
strategy is one that scores well. “Well” may mean  a score at least
high as the average score in the population, or  at least as high as the scores
of the most successful agents in the population. Under those
conditions, it is much more important, in a particular round of the
game, to raise your own score than to lower your opponent's. Axelrod
repeatedly  advised participants in his tournaments
not to be envious. In the 2IPD, however, the population size is two.
In that case it is as valuable to lower your opponent's payoff as to
raise your own, and it can even be beneficial to lower your own
payoff, if doing so lowers your opponent's more than yours.
Another noteworthy feature of the 2IPD, proved rigorously in Press and
Dyson , is that a long memory is unnecessary to play well.
Suppose I adopt a memory-one strategy i.e., I condition each move only
on our last interaction. Then Press and Dyson show that you can't
benefit by using a longer memory: whatever strategy you adopt, there
is an equivalent memory-one strategy you could have adopted that would
net us both the same scores. By adopting a memory-one strategy myself,
I ensure that a longer memory will be of no benefit to you. Thus we
can, without loss of generality, take the 2IPD game to be a game
between agents with memory-one strategies.
A 2IPD game between memory-one agents  can be represented in a particularly
perspicuous way. Let \ be the four
outcomes \ and \. The memory-one
strategies  are the
strategies \\) of cooperating with probability
\ after outcomes \.
 for \, the initial move can be
ignored.). Let \\) and \\)
be the strategies of players One and Two.  and \ both give the probability
of cooperation after receiving the sucker payoff and \ and
\ give the probability of cooperation after receiving
temptation.) Let \ and \ )  and \ are odds of defection). Then
we can represent the 2IPD between One and Two as a “Markov
transition matrix,” that displays the odds of moving from any
state to any state.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
For example, the odds of moving from state \, where One
cooperates and Two defects to state \ where both players
defect is given in the second row and the fourth column: \.
Viewing a game in this way makes it possible apply the machinery of
matrix algebra and Markov chains, which led Press and Dyson to the
identification of the class of Zero-Determinant  strategies. 
A ZD strategy is a strategy by which a player can ensure a fixed
linear relation between his own long-term average payoff and his
opponent's. For example,
TFT
\)\)
turns out to be such a strategy for any PD. If I adopt
TFT
, then I guarantee that, whatever strategy you
choose, we will get the same payoff. If you choose unconditional
cooperation \)\) or
GTFT
\)\) we both get the reward payoff, if you choose
unconditional defection we both approach an average of the punishment.
For other choices, you may get a payoff between the punishment and
reward. Whatever you choose, however, you will still get the same
payoff as me.
There are a variety of such ZD strategies for the IPD . For a standard PD with payoffs 5, 3,
1, 0, three other representative ZD strategies are the following:
\[
\begin{align}
\textbf{SET-2}    & = \bS, \\
\textbf{EXTORT-2} & = \bS, \\
\textbf{GEN-2}    & = \bS.
\end{align}
\]
Press and Dyson emphasize strategies like
SET-2
and
EXTORT-2
. If Player One adopts
SET-2
, then Player Two will get a payoff of 2 no
matter what strategy she employs. In the memory-one 2IPD a player can
set his opponent's strategy to any value between the punishment and
reward payoffs. Hilbe et al. call such strategies
“equalizer” strategies, but in our context perhaps
“dictator” would be a better label. If Player One knows
about the dictator strategies and knows Player Two to be a naïve
utility-maximizer, he can trick her into playing a strategy that suits
him by raising the level to which he sets her payoff when her recent
play satisfies his desires. Of course, a more witting Player Two might
realize that the same dictatorial strategies are available to her.
These will be of no use, however, unless they lead to a shift in
Player One's behavior. If the existence of the dictator strategies is
common knowledge for the two players, then they might profitably agree
to set each other's scores to the reward payoff. Since each is
employing a dictator strategy, neither can benefit in the short term
by deviating. If either deviates in hopes of a long term gain, the
other could detect it by the change in his or her own payoff and take
retaliatory action. Whether such an agreement is stable, of course,
depends on whether the players can make their threats of retaliation
credible.
EXTORT-2
is an example of an
“extortionary” ZD strategy. If Player One adopts
EXTORT-2
, then his payoff \\) will
always be \-1\) \) is the
payoff to Player Two). Player Two can, of course, guarantee herself a
return of at least one by constant defection. If she does, Player One
will defect with increasing frequency and their average payoffs will
both approach the punishment value. Because of the linear relation
that links their payoffs, however, if she does better than this, she
will necessarily lose to Player One. Indeed, any increment above
punishment to her own score will be only half the same increment to
her opponent's. Against a naïve, utility-maximizing opponent,
EXTORT-2
is even more effective than
SET-2
. No tricks are needed. Whenever the naïve
opponent scores more than the punishment payoff she loses to the
extortionist. Whatever she does to increase her own payoff, will, of
necessity, increase the extortionist's by double the amount. The best
that she can do against
EXTORT-2
is to cooperate
unconditionally. This will result in the pair realizing the outcomes
\ and \ in a ratio of three to one, giving the her
an average payoff of 2.25, while the extortionist nets 3.5. Her only
hope of escape is to abandon utility-maximization and acquire what
Press and Dyson call a “theory of mind.” If she realizes
that her actions might cause the extortionist to abandon his strategy,
she might herself adopt an extortionary strategy. This would lower
both of their payoffs in the short term, but she might hope for better
results in the long term. The upshot, according to Press and Dyson, is
that while an extortionist strategy will always defeat a naïve
utility-maximizer, the 2IPD between an extortionist and a more
sophisticated agent becomes an ultimatum game. The extortionist
proposes an unfair division of the joint payoffs, leaving his opponent
with the unhappy choice of accepting it or making both players worse
off. 
Neither dictatorial nor extortionary strategies would seem likely to
fare well in an evolutionary setting with larger populations. By
definition, successful strategies become more commonplace in an
evolutionary framework, and therefore more likely to face others like
themselves. Because dictators and extortionists do not do well against
themselves, any success they have in the evolutionary context will be
self-limiting. Hilbe et al. confirm these intuitions. They show that
when a very small population of general memory-one strategies is
subject to mutation and evolution, the time that agents spend
approximating ZD strategies is reasonably high compared the number of
such strategies that are possible, the relative time spent
approximating dictator strategies in particular is higher, and the
relative time spent approximating extortionary strategies much higher
still. As population size increases, however, the proportion of time
spent approximating all three categories drops rapidly. When the
population exceeds ten, time spent as exemplars of these strategies is
virtually zero. At about the same population level, the average
components \ and \ of the strategies \\) of
surviving agents  rise rapidly while average components y
and w decline slowly, so that in larger populations the average of the
strategies looks like \\)—an imperfect
version of \. , the average payoff increases and
approaches the reward value. This suggests that in some circumstances
the familiar idea that cooperation is more difficult among large
groups than small ones gets matters exactly backwards.)
Although extortionary ZD strategies fare poorly under evolution, Hilbe
et al., suggest that they do play an important evolutionary role, as
“catalysts” for the evolution of cooperation. They explore
in some detail the course of evolution among agents restricted to a
small choice of strategies, including unconditional defection, an
extortionary ZD strategy and the familiar 
strategy \. In the absence of extorters, unconditional
defection predominates in a population of any size. In the presence of
extorters, however, \ becomes more successful as population
size increases. In populations larger than fifty, it predominates. The
same basic results hold when unconditional cooperation is added as a
strategy choice. In the absence of extortionary strategies
TFT
can play a similar catalytic role, allowing
\ to predominate over unconditional defection . The short explanation is that
TFT
and the extortionary strategies can both drift
into a population of unconditional defectors as neutral mutants, and
the proportion of
TFT
can grow for a time.
Eventually, however, \ will do better than either.
It should be noted that Hilbe et al. defend and employ a
“pairwise comparison” model of evolution that is markedly
different from the kinds of evolutionary dynamics discussed previously
in this entry. At each stage a pair of agents is randomly selected and
the first adopts the strategy of the second with a probability that
increases with the difference between their payoffs. Under this kind
of dynamics, if the rate of mutation is sufficiently low, the
population will always move to “fixation,” i.e., a state
in which every agent employs the same strategy. The time to reach
fixation increases with population size and, if every strategy gets
the same payoff against every other, then the odds of strategy \
becoming fixed are proportional to the fraction of the population that
employs \. These features correspond to familiar properties in
population genetics but they are not true of, for example, the
replicator dynamics.
In a commentary on the article introducing ZD strategies, Stewart and
Plotkin  point out that more generous ZD strategies like
GEN-2
had been relatively neglected by Press and
Dyson. If Player One adopts
GEN-2
in a 2IPD with
traditional payoff matrix, then his payoff \\) will be
\-3\). Player Two then can allow Player One any payoff
between the punishment value of one and the reward value of three,
while ensuring that her own payoff is larger. Her highest paying
response is \, which results in the average long-term payoff of
three to both players. If she is willing to adopt a strategy that
reduces her average payoff below the reward level, she will reduce
Player One's by twice as much. Stewart and Plotkin  report that
a strategy like
GEN-2
actually gets the highest score
among nineteen strategies in a simulated IPD tournament like Axelrod's
that includes
TFT
,
GTFT
, \,
GRIM
and other strategies championed in previous
writings. A version of
EXTORT-2
gets the second
lowest score. Significantly, the
EXTORT-2
version won
the second most “head-to-head” contests, and the
GEN-2
version won the fourth fewest. As Axelrod
emphasized in connection with
TFT
, beating one's
opponents is not the path to success in a PD tournament. Suggestive as
it is, however, the Stewart and Plotkin commentary leaves open the
question of whether it is the ZD-character of strategies like
GEN-2
that engenders their success.
In more recent work, Stewart and Plotkin  present evidence that
supports a qualifiedly affirmative answer to the open question. Their
work borrows from a detailed mathematical investigation of the
infinite IPD by Ethan Akin. Akin, 2013) focuses on strategies that
satisfy exactly the conditions we might want for a morally appropriate
“solution” to the 2IPD:  use by both players ensures
the cooperative payoff,  use by both players constitutes a nash
equilibrium, i.e., a strategy-pair giving each player a payoff that he
cannnot improve upon by deviating from it unilaterally and use by
both players prevents exploitation by either—any change in
strategy by either player that reduces the payoff of his opponent will
also reduce his own. Akin labels such strategies “good”
and derives a remarkably simple characterization of them. A strategy
\\) is good if and only if it meets the following
conditions:
\[
\begin{align}
p_1 & = 1, \\
 & \ne , \\
p_3\tfrac{}{} & \lt , \text{ and} \\
p_4\tfrac{}{} & \lt .
\end{align}
\]
It is easy to check that, with standard PD payoffs,
GRIM
,
TFT
,
GTFT
and
GEN-2
all meet these conditions, but
EXTORT-2
,
SET-2
and \ do
not.  does meet the conditions when the payoffs satisfy \\).)
Stewart and Plotkin show that the good strategies that are also ZD are
exactly the generous ZD strategies, i.e., those like
GEN-2
that concede a greater share of the payoffs
between punishment and reward to the opponent. When the investigations
of Hilbe et al. are extended to include focus on the good strategies
and, in particular, to the generous ZD strategies, the patterns
exhibited turn out to be quite different. In small populations,
strategies spend little time near these strategies in these two groups
 and in larger populations they spend a much
larger proportion of their time there. In big populations a very high
proportion of the strategies most strongly favored by evolution are
both good and ZD. The story is not entirely straightforward, however.
Strategies that are good but not ZD are moderately favored by
evolution, and a few strategies that are neither ZD nor good, are also
strongly favored.
There is no doubt that the identification of the ZD strategies has
newly energized investigations into simple games and into the IPD in
particular. Its lessons for the evolutionary PD and for the emergence
of cooperation are not yet fully understood.
21. Group Selection and the Haystack PD
A third mechanism by which players can be made more likely to meet
those like themselves is to consider a more sophisticated dynamics of
evolution that operates on groups of players as well as on the
individuals within those groups. There has been a heated debate among
biologists and philosophers of biology about the appropriate
“units of selection” on which natural selection operates.
The idea that in many cases it makes sense to take these units to be
groups of individuals  has recently been resuscitated as a respectable and
plausible viewpoint.  For cultural
evolution, the idea is equally plausible—within-group behavior
may be in equilibrium, but the equilibria reached by different groups
may be different. Less successful groups may imitate, be replaced by,
or lose members to, more successful groups. Sober and Wilson sometimes
write as if evolutionary game theory is an
alternative
viewpoint to group selection, but it is important to understand that
this is only true of simple evolutionary models like those presented
above. More sophisticated evolutionary games are possible. Consider,
for example, a simple version of the
haystack model
originally described by John Maynard Smith. Pairs of players from a
large population pair randomly. Each pair colonizes a single haystack.
The pair plays a prisoners dilemma and the payoffs to an individual
determine the number of offspring of that individual in the next
generation.  For some fixed
number of generations, members of the colony pair randomly with other
members and play the PD. Then the haystacks are torn down, the
population mixes and random pairs colonize next season's haystacks.
One simple way to represent the \-generation
haystack PD
,
as we might call it, is to view it as a game between the two initial
founders of a haystack with the payoff to a founder being set to the
number of living descendants who are using his strategy.  For example,
suppose \ and the temptation, reward, punishment and sucker
payoffs are set to 5, 3, 1, 0. Then, if Player One cooperates and
player Two defects, the payoff to Player One will be 0, because a
cooperator gets 0 offspring in the second, and any subsequent,
generation. The payoff to player Two will be 5 because the defector
has five  offspring among the second generation and each
of these has one in the third generation since there are no
cooperators left to meet. The full payoff matrix for the four
generation haystack PD with payoffs 3,2,1, and 0 is given by the
matrix below.
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
As Skyrms 2004 notes, this matrix characterizes an ordinary stag hunt
game, as defined above. In fact, Skyrms' observation is generally
true. For any PD game \, if \ is sufficiently large, the
\-generation haystack version of \ is a stag hunt. A simple
argument for this result is given in the following very short
supplementary document:
Haystack PDs Become Stag Hunts
.